In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth.
the earth was without form and void,  darkness was upon the face of the deep,  the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters.
God said, Let there be light,  there was light.
God saw the light, that it was good. And God divided the light from the darkness.
God called the light Day,  the darkness he called Night. And there was evening and there was morning, one day.
God said, Let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters,  let it divide the waters from the waters.
God made the firmament,  divided the waters which were under the firmament from the waters which were above the firmament. And it was so.
God called the firmament Heaven. And there was evening and there was morning, a second day.
God said, Let the waters under the heavens be gathered together to one place,  let the dry land appear. And it was so.
God called the dry land Earth,  he called the gathering together of the waters Seas. And God saw that it was good.
God said, Let the earth put forth grass, herbs yielding seed,  fruit trees bearing fruit according to their kind (in which is the seed of them) upon the earth. And it was so.
the earth brought forth grass, herbs yielding seed according to their kind,  trees bearing fruit in which is the seed of it, according to their kind. And God saw that it was good.
there was evening and there was morning, a third day.
God said, Let there be lights in the firmament of heaven to divide the day from the night,  let them be for signs,  for seasons,  for days and years.
let them be for lights in the firmament of heaven to give light upon the earth. And it was so.
God made the two great lights, the greater light to rule the day,  the lesser light to rule the night, also the stars.
God set them in the firmament of heaven to give light upon the earth,
to rule over the day and over the night,  to divide the light from the darkness. And God saw that it was good.
there was evening and there was morning, a fourth day.
God said, Let the waters swarm with swarms of living creatures,  let birds fly above the earth in the open firmament of heaven.
God created the great sea creatures,  every living creature that moves, which the waters brought forth abundantly, according to their kind,  every winged bird according to its kind. And God saw that it was good.
God blessed them, saying, Be fruitful,  multiply,  fill the waters in the seas,  let birds multiply on the earth.
there was evening and there was morning, a fifth day.
God said, Let the earth bring forth living creatures according to their kind, cattle,  creeping things,  beasts of the earth according to their kind. And it was so.
God made the beasts of the earth according to their kind,  the cattle according to their kind,  everything that creeps upon the ground according to its kind. And God saw that it was good.
God said, Let us make mankind in our image-after our likeness-and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea,  over the birds of the heavens,  over the cattle,  over all the earth,  over every creeping thing that creeps upon the earth.
God created mankind in his own image, in the image of God he created him, male and female he created them.
God blessed them. And God said to them, Be fruitful,  multiply,  fill the earth,  have power over it,  have dominion over the fish of the sea,  over the birds of the heavens,  over every living thing that moves upon the earth.
God said, Behold, I have given you every herb yielding seed, which is upon the face of all the earth,  every tree, in which is the fruit of a tree yielding seed. To you it shall be for food,
to every beast of the earth,  to every bird of the heavens,  to everything that creeps upon the earth in which there is life, for food-every green herb. And it was so.
God saw everything that he had made, , behold, it was very good. And there was evening and there was morning, the sixth day.
the heavens and the earth were finished,  all the host of them.
on the seventh day God finished his work which he had made,  he rested on the seventh day from all his work which he had made.
God blessed the seventh day,  hallowed it, because in it he rested from all his work which God had created and made.
These are the generations of the heavens and of the earth when they were created, in the day that Jehovah God made earth and heaven.
no plant of the field was yet in the earth,  no herb of the field had yet sprung up, for Jehovah God had not caused it to rain upon the earth. And there was not a man to till the ground,
but there went up a mist from the earth,  watered the whole face of the ground.
Jehovah God formed man of the dust of the ground,  breathed into his nostrils the breath of life,  man became a living soul.
Jehovah God planted a garden eastward, in Eden,  there he put the man whom he had formed.
out of the ground Jehovah God made to grow every tree that is pleasant to the sight,  good for food, also the tree of life in the midst of the garden,  the tree of the knowledge of good and evil.
a river went out of Eden to water the garden,  from there it was divided,  became four heads.
The name of the first is Pishon. That is it which encompasses the whole land of Havilah, where there is gold.
the gold of that land is good. There is bdellium and the onyx stone.
the name of the second river is Gihon. The same is it which encompasses the whole land of Cush.
the name of the third river is Hiddekel. That is it which goes in front of Assyria. And the fourth river is the Euphrates.
Jehovah God took the man,  put him into the garden of Eden to dress it and to keep it.
Jehovah God commanded the man, saying, Of every tree of the garden thou may freely eat,
but of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not eat of it. For in the day that thou eat of it thou shall surely die.
Jehovah God said, It is not good that the man should be alone, I will make a help meet for him.
out of the ground Jehovah God formed every beast of the field,  every bird of the heavens,  brought them to the man to see what he would call them,  whatever the man called every living creature, that was the name of it.
the man gave names to all cattle,  to the birds of the heavens,  to every beast of the field,  for man there was not found a help meet for him.
Jehovah God caused a deep sleep to fall upon the man,  he slept. And God took one of his ribs,  closed up the flesh in place of it.
the rib, which Jehovah God had taken from the man, he made a woman,  brought her to the man.
the man said, This is now bone of my bones,  flesh of my flesh. She shall be called Woman, because she was taken out of Man.
Therefore a man shall leave his father and his mother,  shall cling to his wife,  the two shall be one flesh.
they were both naked, the man and his wife,  were not ashamed.
Now the serpent was more cunning than any beast of the field which Jehovah God had made. And he said to the woman, Yea, has God said, Ye shall not eat of any tree of the garden?
the woman said to the serpent, Of the fruit of the trees of the garden we may eat,
but of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the garden, God has said, Ye shall not eat of it, nor shall ye touch it, lest ye die.
the serpent said to the woman, Ye shall not surely die.
For God knows that in the day ye eat of it, then your eyes shall be opened,  ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil.
when the woman saw that the tree was good for food,  that it was a delight to the eyes,  that the tree was to be desired to make wise, she took of the fruit of it,  ate. And she also gave to her husband with her,  he ate.
the eyes of them both were opened,  they knew that they were naked. And they sewed fig leaves together,  made themselves aprons.
they heard the voice of Jehovah God walking in the garden in the cool of the day. And the man and his wife hid themselves from the presence of Jehovah God amongst the trees of the garden.
Jehovah God called to the man,  said to him, Where are thou?
he said, I heard thy voice in the garden,  I was afraid, because I was naked. And I hid myself.
he said, Who told thee that thou was naked? Have thou eaten of the tree, of which I commanded thee that thou should not eat?
the man said, The woman whom thou gave to be with me, she gave me of the tree,  I ate.
Jehovah God said to the woman, What is this thou have done? And the woman said, The serpent beguiled me,  I ate.
Jehovah God said to the serpent, Because thou have done this, cursed are thou above all cattle,  above every beast of the field. Upon thy belly thou shall go,  dust thou shall eat all the days of thy life.
I will put enmity between thee and the woman,  between thy seed and her seed. He shall bruise thy head,  thou shall bruise his heel.
To the woman he said, I will greatly multiply thy pain and thy childbearing, in pain thou shall bring forth children. And thy desire shall be to thy husband,  he shall rule over thee.
to Adam he said, Because thou have hearkened to the voice of thy wife,  have eaten of the tree, of which I commanded thee, saying, Thou shall not eat of it, cursed is the ground for thy sake. In toil thou shall eat of it all the days of thy life.
Also, thorns and thistles it shall bring forth to thee,  thou shall eat the herb of the field.
In the sweat of thy face thou shall eat bread, till thou return to the ground, for out of it thou were taken. For thou are dust,  to dust thou shall return.
the man called his wife's name Eve, because she was the mother of all living.
Jehovah God made for Adam and for his wife coats of skins,  clothed them.
Jehovah God said, Behold, the man has become as one of us, to know good and evil,  now, lest he put forth his hand,  take also of the tree of life,  eat,  live forever-
therefore Jehovah God sent him forth from the garden of Eden, to till the ground from where he was taken.
So he drove out the man. And he placed at the east of the garden of Eden the cherubim,  the flame of a sword which turned every way, to guard the way of the tree of life.
the man knew Eve his wife,  she conceived,  bore Cain,  said, I have gotten a man from Jehovah.
again she bore his brother Abel. And Abel was a keeper of sheep,  Cain was a tiller of the ground.
in process of time it came to pass, that Cain brought an offering to Jehovah of the fruit of the ground.
Abel, he also brought of the firstlings of his flock and of the fat of it. And Jehovah had respect to Abel and to his offering,
but he did not have respect to Cain and to his offering. And Cain was very angry,  his countenance fell.
Jehovah said to Cain, Why are thou angry? And why has thy countenance fallen?
If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? And if thou do not well, sin crouches at the door. Its desire shall be for thee,  thou shall rule over it.
Cain told Abel his brother. And it came to pass, when they were in the field, that Cain rose up against Abel his brother,  killed him.
Jehovah said to Cain, Where is Abel thy brother? And he said, I know not. Am I my brother's keeper?
he said, What have thou done? The voice of thy brother's blood cries to me from the ground.
now cursed are thou from the ground, which has opened its mouth to receive thy brother's blood from thy hand.
When thou till the ground, it shall not henceforth yield to thee its strength. A fugitive and a wanderer thou shall be on the earth.
Cain said to Jehovah, My punishment is greater than I can bear.
Behold, thou have driven me out this day from the face of the ground,  I shall be hid from thy face,  I shall be a fugitive and a wanderer in the earth. And it shall come to pass, that whoever finds me shall slay me.
Jehovah said to him, Therefore whoever kills Cain, vengeance shall be taken on him sevenfold. And Jehovah appointed a sign for Cain, lest any who finds him should smite him.
Cain went out from the presence of Jehovah,  dwelt in the land of Nod, on the east of Eden.
Cain knew his wife,  she conceived,  bore Enoch. And Cain built a city,  called the name of the city after the name of his son, Enoch.
to Enoch was born Irad,  Irad begot Mehujael,  Mehujael begot Methushael,  Methushael begot Lamech.
Lamech took to him two wives. The name of the one was Adah,  the name of the other Zillah.
Adah bore Jabal. He was the father of such as dwell in tents and have cattle.
his brother's name was Jubal. He was the father of all such as handle the harp and pipe.
Zillah, she also bore Tubal-cain, the forger of every cutting instrument of brass and iron. And the sister of Tubal-cain was Naamah.
Lamech said to his wives, Adah and Zillah, Hear my voice, ye wives of Lamech, hearken to my speech. For I have killed a man for wounding me,  a young man for bruising me.
If Cain shall be avenged seven fold, truly Lamech seventy-seven fold.
Adam knew his wife again,  she bore a son,  called his name Seth. For, she said, God has appointed for me another seed instead of Abel, for Cain killed him.
to Seth, to him also there was born a son,  he called his name Enosh. Then men began to call upon the name of Jehovah.
This is the book of the generations of Adam. In the day that God created man, in the likeness of God he made him,
male and female he created them,  blessed them,  called their name Man, in the day when they were created.
Adam lived a hundred and thirty years,  begot a son in his own likeness, according to his image,  called his name Seth.
the days of Adam were eight hundred years after he begot Seth. And he begot sons and daughters.
all the days that Adam lived were nine hundred and thirty years,  he died.
Seth lived a hundred and five years,  begot Enosh.
Seth lived eight hundred and seven years after he begot Enosh,  begot sons and daughters.
all the days of Seth were nine hundred and twelve years,  he died.
Enosh lived ninety years,  begot Kenan.
Enosh lived eight hundred and fifteen years after he begot Kenan,  begot sons and daughters.
all the days of Enosh were nine hundred and five years,  he died.
Kenan lived seventy years,  begot Mahalalel.
Kenan lived eight hundred and forty years after he begot Mahalalel,  begot sons and daughters.
all the days of Kenan were nine hundred and ten years,  he died.
Mahalalel lived sixty-five years,  begot Jared.
Mahalalel lived eight hundred and thirty years after he begot Jared,  begot sons and daughters.
all the days of Mahalalel were eight hundred and ninety-five years,  he died.
Jared lived a hundred sixty-two years,  begot Enoch.
Jared lived eight hundred years after he begot Enoch,  begot sons and daughters.
all the days of Jared were nine hundred sixty-two years,  he died.
Enoch lived sixty-five years,  begot Methuselah.
Enoch walked with God after he begot Methuselah three hundred years,  begot sons and daughters.
all the days of Enoch were three hundred sixty-five years.
Enoch walked with God,  he was not, for God took him.
Methuselah lived a hundred eighty-seven years,  begot Lamech.
Methuselah lived seven hundred eighty-two years after he begot Lamech,  begot sons and daughters.
all the days of Methuselah were nine hundred sixty-nine years,  he died.
Lamech lived a hundred eighty-two years,  begot a son.
he called his name Noah, saying, This same shall comfort us in our work and in the toil of our hands, because of the ground which Jehovah has cursed.
Lamech lived five hundred ninety-five years after he begot Noah,  begot sons and daughters.
all the days of Lamech were seven hundred seventy-seven years,  he died.
Noah was five hundred years old. And Noah begot Shem, Ham,  Japheth.
it came to pass, when men began to multiply on the face of the ground,  daughters were born to them,
that the sons of God saw the daughters of men that they were fair. And they took to them wives of all that they chose.
Jehovah said, My Spirit shall not abide in man forever, for he also is flesh. Yet shall his days be a hundred and twenty years.
The giants were on the earth in those days. And also after that, when the sons of God came to the daughters of men,  they bore sons to them, the same were the mighty men who were of old, the men of renown.
Jehovah saw that the wickedness of man was great on the earth,  that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually.
Jehovah regretted that he had made man on the earth,  it grieved him in his heart.
Jehovah said, I will destroy man whom I have created from the face of the ground, from man, to beast, to creeping things,  birds of the heavens, for I regret that I have made them.
But Noah found favor in the eyes of Jehovah.
These are the generations of Noah. Noah was a righteous man, perfect in his generations. Noah walked with God.
Noah begot three sons, Shem, Ham,  Japheth.
the earth was corrupt before God,  the earth was filled with violence.
God saw the earth, , behold, it was corrupt, for all flesh had corrupted their way upon the earth.
God said to Noah, The end of all flesh has come before me, for the earth is filled with violence through them, , behold, I will destroy them with the earth.
Make thee an ark of gopher wood. Thou shall make rooms in the ark,  shall pitch it inside and outside with pitch.
this is how thou shall make it: The length of the ark three hundred cubits, the breadth of it fifty cubits,  the height of it thirty cubits.
Thou shall make a light for the ark,  thou shall finish it to a cubit upward. And thou shall set the door of the ark in the side of it, with lower, second,  third stories thou shall make it.
I, behold, I bring the flood of waters upon this earth, to destroy all flesh, in which is the breath of life, from under heaven. Everything that is on the earth shall die.
But I will establish my covenant with thee. And thou shall come into the ark, thou,  thy sons,  thy wife,  thy sons' wives with thee.
of every living thing of all flesh, two of every sort thou shall bring into the ark, to keep them alive with thee. They shall be male and female.
Of the birds according to their kind,  of the cattle according to their kind, of every creeping thing of the ground according to its kind. Two of every sort shall come to thee, to keep them alive.
take thou to thee of all food that is eaten,  gather it to thee,  it shall be for food for thee,  for them.
Thus Noah did; according to all that God commanded him, so he did.
Jehovah said to Noah, Come, thou and all thy house into the ark, for I have seen thee righteous before me in this generation.
Of every clean beast thou shall take to thee by sevens, the male and his female. And of the beasts that are not clean two, the male and his female.
Also of the birds of the heavens by sevens, male and female, to keep seed alive upon the face of all the earth.
For yet seven days,  I will cause it to rain upon the earth forty days and forty nights,  every living thing that I have made I will destroy from off the face of the ground.
Noah did according to all that Jehovah commanded him.
Noah was six hundred years old when the flood of waters was upon the earth.
Noah went in,  his sons,  his wife,  his sons' wives with him, into the ark, because of the waters of the flood.
Of clean beasts,  of beasts that are not clean,  of birds,  of everything that creeps upon the ground,
there went in two by two to Noah into the ark, male and female, as God commanded Noah.
it came to pass after the seven days, that the waters of the flood were upon the earth.
In the six hundredth year of Noah's life, in the second month, on the seventeenth day of the month, on the same day all the fountains of the great deep were broken up,  the windows of heaven were opened.
the rain was upon the earth forty days and forty nights.
In the selfsame day Noah,  Shem,  Ham,  Japheth, the sons of Noah,  Noah's wife,  the three wives of his sons with them, entered into the ark,
they,  every beast according to its kind,  all the cattle according to their kind,  every creeping thing that creeps upon the earth according to its kind,  every bird according to its kind, every bird of every sort.
they went in to Noah into the ark, two by two of all flesh in which is the breath of life.
those that went in, went in male and female of all flesh, as God commanded him. And Jehovah shut him in.
the flood was forty days upon the earth. And the waters increased,  bore up the ark,  it was lifted up above the earth.
the waters prevailed,  increased greatly upon the earth,  the ark went upon the face of the waters.
the waters prevailed exceedingly upon the earth,  all the high mountains that were under the whole heaven were covered,
fifteen cubits upward. The waters prevailed,  the mountains were covered.
all flesh died that moved upon the earth, from birds, to cattle, to beasts,  every creeping thing that creeps upon the earth,  every man.
All in whose nostrils was the breath of the spirit of life, of all that was on the dry land, died.
every living thing was destroyed that was upon the face of the ground, from man, to cattle, to creeping things,  birds of the heavens,  they were destroyed from the earth. And only Noah was left,  those who were with him in the ark.
the waters prevailed upon the earth a hundred and fifty days.
God remembered Noah,  all the beasts,  all the cattle that were with him in the ark. And God made a wind to pass over the earth,  the waters subsided.
Also the fountains of the deep and the windows of heaven were stopped,  the rain from heaven was restrained.
the waters returned from off the earth continually. And after the end of a hundred and fifty days the waters decreased.
the ark rested in the seventh month, on the seventeenth day of the month, upon the mountains of Ararat.
the waters decreased continually until the tenth month. In the tenth month, on the first day of the month, the tops of the mountains were seen.
it came to pass at the end of forty days, that Noah opened the window of the ark which he had made.
he sent forth a raven. And it went forth to and fro, until the waters were dried up from off the earth.
he sent forth a dove from him, to see if the waters were abated from off the face of the ground.
But the dove found no rest for the sole of her foot. And she returned to him to the ark, for the waters were on the face of the whole earth. And he put forth his hand,  took her,  brought her in to him into the ark.
he stayed yet another seven days,  again he sent forth the dove out of the ark.
the dove came in to him at evening. And, lo, in her mouth an olive leaf plucked off, so Noah knew that the waters were abated from off the earth.
he stayed yet seven other days,  sent forth the dove. And she did not return again to him any more.
it came to pass in the six hundred and first year, in the first month, the first day of the month, the waters were dried up from off the earth. And Noah removed the covering of the ark,  looked. And, behold, the face of the ground was dried.
in the second month, on the twenty-seventh day of the month, the earth was dry.
God spoke to Noah, saying,
Go forth from the ark, thou,  thy wife,  thy sons,  thy sons' wives with thee.
Bring forth with thee every living thing that is with thee of all flesh, both birds and cattle,  every creeping thing that creeps upon the earth, that they may breed abundantly on the earth,  be fruitful,  multiply upon the earth.
Noah went forth,  his sons,  his wife,  his sons' wives with him.
Every beast, every creeping thing,  every bird, whatever moves upon the earth, according to their families, went forth out of the ark.
Noah built an altar to Jehovah,  took of every clean beast,  of every clean bird,  offered burnt offerings on the altar.
Jehovah smelled the sweet savor. And Jehovah said in his heart, I will not again curse the ground any more for man's sake, for that the imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth. Neither will I again any more smite everything living, as I have done.
While the earth remains, seedtime and harvest,  cold and heat,  summer and winter,  day and night shall not cease.
God blessed Noah and his sons,  said to them, Be fruitful,  multiply,  fill the earth.
the fear of you and the dread of you shall be upon every beast of the earth,  upon every bird of the heavens, with all with which the ground teems,  all the fishes of the sea. They are delivered into your hand.
Every moving thing that lives shall be food for you. As the green herb, I have given you all.
But flesh with the life of it, which is the blood of it, ye shall not eat.
surely your blood, the blood of your lives, I will require. At the hand of every beast I will require it. And at the hand of man, even at the hand of every man's brother, I will require the life of man.
Whoever sheds man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed. For in the image of God he made man.
you, be ye fruitful,  multiply. Bring forth abundantly on the earth,  multiply on it.
God spoke to Noah,  to his sons with him, saying,
I, behold, I establish my covenant with you,  with your seed after you,
with every living creature that is with you, the birds, the cattle,  every beast of the earth with you, of all that go out of the ark, even every beast of the earth.
I will establish my covenant with you. Neither shall all flesh be cut off any more by the waters of the flood, nor shall there be a flood any more to destroy the earth.
God said, This is the sign of the covenant which I make between me and you and every living creature that is with you, for perpetual generations:
I set my bow in the cloud,  it shall be for a sign of a covenant between me and the earth.
it shall come to pass, when I bring a cloud over the earth, that the bow shall be seen in the cloud.
I will remember my covenant, which is between me and you and every living creature of all flesh. And the waters shall no more become a flood to destroy all flesh.
the bow shall be in the cloud,  I will look upon it, that I may remember the everlasting covenant between God and every living creature of all flesh that is upon the earth.
God said to Noah, This is the sign of the covenant which I have established between me and all flesh that is upon the earth.
the sons of Noah, who went forth from the ark, were Shem,  Ham,  Japheth. And Ham is the father of Canaan.
These three were the sons of Noah,  from these the whole earth was spread over.
Noah began to be a farmer,  planted a vineyard.
he drank of the wine,  was drunken. And he was uncovered within his tent.
Ham, the father of Canaan, saw the nakedness of his father,  told his two brothers outside.
Shem and Japheth took a garment,  laid it upon both their shoulders,  went backward,  covered the nakedness of their father. And their faces were backward,  they did not see their father's nakedness.
Noah awoke from his wine,  knew what his youngest son had done to him.
he said, Cursed be Canaan. He shall be a servant of servants to his brothers.
he said, Blessed be Jehovah, the God of Shem. And let Canaan be his servant.
God enlarge Japheth,  let him dwell in the tents of Shem. And let Canaan be his servant.
Noah lived three hundred and fifty years after the flood.
all the days of Noah were nine hundred and fifty years,  he died.
Now these are the generations of the sons of Noah, of Shem, Ham,  Japheth. And sons were born to them after the flood.
The sons of Japheth: Gomer,  Magog,  Madai,  Javan,  Tubal,  Meshech,  Tiras.
the sons of Gomer: Ashkenaz,  Riphath,  Togarmah.
the sons of Javan: Elishah,  Tarshish, Kittim,  Dodanim.
From these were the islands of the nations divided in their lands, every man according to his tongue, according to their families, in their nations.
the sons of Ham: Cush,  Mizraim,  Put,  Canaan.
the sons of Cush: Seba,  Havilah,  Sabtah,  Raamah,  Sabteca. And the sons of Raamah: Sheba,  Dedan.
Cush begot Nimrod. He began to be a mighty man on the earth.
He was a mighty hunter before Jehovah. Therefore it is said, Like Nimrod a mighty hunter before Jehovah.
the beginning of his kingdom was Babel,  Erech,  Accad,  Calneh, in the land of Shinar.
He went forth out of that land into Assyria,  built Nineveh,  Rehoboth-ir,  Calah,
Resen between Nineveh and Calah (the same is the great city).
Mizraim begot Ludim,  Anamim,  Lehabim,  Naphtuhim,
Pathrusim,  Casluhim (from where the Philistines went forth),  Caphtorim.
Canaan begot Sidon his firstborn,  Heth,
the Jebusite,  the Amorite,  the Girgashite,
the Hivite,  the Arkite,  the Sinite,
the Arvadite,  the Zemarite,  the Hamathite. And afterward the families of the Canaanite were spread abroad.
the border of the Canaanite was from Sidon, as thou go toward Gerar, to Gaza, as thou go toward Sodom and Gomorrah and Admah and Zeboiim, to Lasha.
These are the sons of Ham, according to their families, according to their tongues, in their lands, in their nations.
to Shem, the father of all the sons of Eber, the elder brother of Japheth, sons were also born to him.
The sons of Shem: Elam,  Asshur,  Arphaxad,  Lud,  Aram.
the sons of Aram: Uz,  Hul,  Gether,  Mash.
Arphaxad begot Shelah,  Shelah begot Eber.
to Eber were born two sons. The name of the one was Peleg. For in his days the earth was divided. And his brother's name was Joktan.
Joktan begot Almodad,  Sheleph,  Hazarmaveth,  Jerah,
Hadoram,  Uzal,  Diklah,
Obal,  Abimael,  Sheba,
Ophir,  Havilah,  Jobab. All these were the sons of Joktan.
their dwelling was from Mesha, as thou go toward Sephar, the mountain of the east.
These are the sons of Shem, according to their families, according to their tongues, in their lands, according to their nations.
These are the families of the sons of Noah, according to their generations, in their nations. And from these the nations were divided on the earth after the flood.
the whole earth was of one language and of one speech.
it came to pass, as they journeyed east, that they found a plain in the land of Shinar,  they dwelt there.
they said one to another, Come, let us make brick,  burn them thoroughly. And they had brick for stone,  they had slime for mortar.
they said, Come, let us build a city for us,  a tower,  its top in the heavens. And let us make a name for us, lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the whole earth.
Jehovah came down to see the city and the tower, which the sons of men built.
Jehovah said, Behold, they are one people,  they have all one language,  this is what they begin to do. And now nothing will be withheld from them, which they propose to do.
Come, let us go down,  there confound their language, that they may not understand each other's speech.
So Jehovah scattered them abroad from there upon the face of all the earth,  they left off building the city.
Therefore the name of it was called Babel, because Jehovah there confounded the language of all the earth,  from there Jehovah scattered them abroad upon the face of all the earth.
These are the generations of Shem. Shem was a hundred years old,  begot Arphaxad two years after the flood.
Shem lived five hundred years after he begot Arphaxad,  begot sons and daughters.
Arphaxad lived a hundred and thirty-five years,  begot Cainan.
Arphaxad lived after he had begotten Cainan, four hundred years,  begot sons and daughters,  died. And Cainan lived a hundred and thirty years and begot Shelah; and Cainan lived after he had begotten Shelah, three hundred and thirty years,  begot sons and daughters,  died.
Shelah lived thirty years,  begot Eber.
Shelah lived four hundred and three years after he begot Eber,  begot sons and daughters.
Eber lived thirty-four years,  begot Peleg.
Eber lived four hundred and thirty years after he begot Peleg,  begot sons and daughters.
Peleg lived thirty years,  begot Reu.
Peleg lived two hundred and nine years after he begot Reu,  begot sons and daughters.
Reu lived thirty-two years,  begot Serug.
Reu lived two hundred and seven years after he begot Serug,  begot sons and daughters.
Serug lived thirty years,  begot Nahor.
Serug lived two hundred years after he begot Nahor,  begot sons and daughters.
Nahor lived twenty-nine years,  begot Terah.
Nahor lived a hundred and nineteen years after he begot Terah,  begot sons and daughters.
Terah lived seventy years,  begot Abram, Nahor,  Haran.
Now these are the generations of Terah: Terah begot Abram, Nahor,  Haran. And Haran begot Lot.
Haran died before his father Terah in the land of his nativity, in Ur of the Chaldees.
Abram and Nahor took wives to themselves. The name of Abram's wife was Sarai,  the name of Nahor's wife, Milcah, the daughter of Haran, the father of Milcah,  the father of Iscah.
Sarai was barren; she had no child.
Terah took Abram his son,  Lot the son of Haran, his son's son,  Sarai his daughter-in-law, his son Abram's wife. And they went forth with them from Ur of the Chaldees, to go into the land of Canaan. And they came to Haran,  dwelt there.
the days of Terah were two hundred and five years,  Terah died in Haran.
Now Jehovah said to Abram, Get thee out of thy country,  from thy kindred,  from thy father's house, to the land that I will show thee.
I will make of thee a great nation,  I will bless thee,  make thy name great,  be thou a blessing.
I will bless those who bless thee,  he who curses thee I will curse. And in thee shall all the families of the earth be blessed.
So Abram went as Jehovah had spoken to him,  Lot went with him. And Abram was seventy-five years old when he departed out of Haran.
Abram took Sarai his wife,  Lot his brother's son,  all their substance that they had gathered,  the souls that they had gotten in Haran,  they went forth to go into the land of Canaan. And they came into the land of Canaan.
Abram passed through the land to the place of Shechem, to the oak of Moreh. And the Canaanite was then in the land.
Jehovah appeared to Abram,  said, I will give this land to thy seed. And there he built an altar to Jehovah, who appeared to him.
he moved from there to the mountain on the east of Bethel,  pitched his tent, having Bethel on the west,  Ai on the east. And there he built an altar to Jehovah,  called upon the name of Jehovah.
Abram journeyed, going on still toward the South.
there was a famine in the land. And Abram went down into Egypt to sojourn there, for the famine was severe in the land.
it came to pass, when he came near to enter into Egypt, that he said to Sarai his wife, Behold now, I know that thou are a fair woman to look upon.
it shall come to pass, when the Egyptians shall see thee, that they shall say, This is his wife. And they will kill me,  they will save thee alive.
Say, I pray thee, thou are my sister, that it may be well with me for thy sake,  that my soul may live because of thee.
it came to pass, that, when Abram came into Egypt, the Egyptians beheld the woman that she was very fair.
the princes of Pharaoh saw her,  praised her to Pharaoh. And the woman was taken into Pharaoh's house.
he dealt well with Abram for her sake. And he had sheep,  oxen,  he-donkeys,  men-servants,  maid-servants,  she-donkeys,  camels.
Jehovah plagued Pharaoh and his house with great plagues because of Sarai, Abram's wife.
Pharaoh called Abram,  said, What is this that thou have done to me? Why did thou not tell me that she was thy wife?
Why did thou say, She is my sister, so that I took her to be my wife? Now therefore behold thy wife. Take her,  go thy way.
Pharaoh gave men command concerning him. And they brought him on the way,  his wife,  all that he had.
Abram went up out of Egypt, he,  his wife,  all that he had,  Lot with him, into the South.
Abram was very rich in cattle, in silver,  in gold.
he went on his journeys from the South even to Bethel, to the place where his tent had been at the beginning, between Bethel and Ai,
to the place of the altar, which he had made there at the first. And Abram called on the name of Jehovah there.
Lot also, who went with Abram, had flocks,  herds,  tents.
the land was not able to bear them, that they might dwell together. For their substance was great, so that they could not dwell together.
there was a strife between the herdsmen of Abram's cattle and the herdsmen of Lot's cattle. And the Canaanite and the Perizzite then dwelt in the land.
Abram said to Lot, Let there be no strife, I pray thee, between me and thee,  between my herdsmen and thy herdsmen, for we are brothers.
Is not the whole land before thee? Separate thyself, I pray thee, from me. If the left hand, then I will go to the right. Or if the right hand, then I will go to the left.
Lot lifted up his eyes,  beheld all the Plain of the Jordan, that it was well watered everywhere (before Jehovah destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah) like the garden of Jehovah, like the land of Egypt, as thou go to Zoar.
So Lot chose for himself all the Plain of the Jordan. And Lot journeyed east,  they separated themselves the one from the other.
Abram dwelt in the land of Canaan. And Lot dwelt in the cities of the Plain,  moved his tent as far as Sodom.
Now the men of Sodom were exceedingly wicked and sinners against Jehovah.
Jehovah said to Abram, after Lot was separated from him, Lift up now thine eyes,  look from the place where thou are, northward and southward and eastward and westward.
For all the land which thou see, to thee I will give it,  to thy seed forever.
I will make thy seed as the dust of the earth. So that if a man can number the dust of the earth, then may thy seed also be numbered.
Arise, walk through the land in the length of it and in the breadth of it, for to thee I will give it.
Abram moved his tent,  came and dwelt by the oaks of Mamre, which are in Hebron,  built an altar there to Jehovah.
it came to pass in the days of Amraphel king of Shinar, Arioch king of Ellasar, Chedorlaomer king of Elam,  Tidal king of Goiim,
that they made war with Bera king of Sodom,  with Birsha king of Gomorrah, Shinab king of Admah,  Shemeber king of Zeboiim,  the king of Bela (the same is Zoar).
All these joined together in the valley of Siddim (the same is the Salt Sea).
They served Chedorlaomer twelve years,  in the thirteenth year they rebelled.
in the fourteenth year Chedorlaomer came,  the kings that were with him,  smote the Rephaim in Ashteroth-karnaim,  the Zuzim in Ham,  the Emim in Shaveh-kiriathaim,
the Horites on their mount Seir, to Elparan, which is by the wilderness.
they returned,  came to En-mishpat (the same is Kadesh),  smote all the country of the Amalekites,  also the Amorites, who dwelt in Hazazon-tamar.
there went out the king of Sodom,  the king of Gomorrah,  the king of Admah,  the king of Zeboiim,  the king of Bela (the same is Zoar),  they set the battle in array against them in the valley of Siddim,
against Chedorlaomer king of Elam,  Tidal king of Goiim,  Amraphel king of Shinar,  Arioch king of Ellasar; four kings against the five.
Now the valley of Siddim was full of slime pits. And the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah fled,  they fell there. And those who remained fled to the mountain.
they took all the goods of Sodom and Gomorrah,  all their food,  went their way.
they took Lot, Abram's brother's son, who dwelt in Sodom,  his goods,  departed.
some man came who had escaped,  told Abram the Hebrew. Now he dwelt by the oaks of Mamre, the Amorite, brother of Eshcol,  brother of Aner. And these were allies with Abram.
when Abram heard that his brother was taken captive, he led forth his trained men, born in his house, three hundred and eighteen,  pursued as far as Dan.
he divided himself against them by night, he and his servants,  smote them,  pursued them to Hobah, which is on the left hand of Damascus.
he brought back all the goods,  also brought back his brother Lot,  his goods,  also the women,  the people.
the king of Sodom went out to meet him, after his return from the slaughter of Chedorlaomer and the kings that were with him, at the valley of Shaveh (the same is the King's Valley).
Melchizedek king of Salem brought forth bread and wine. And he was priest of God Most High.
he blessed him,  said, Blessed be Abram of God Most High, possessor of heaven and earth.
blessed be God Most High, who has delivered thine enemies into thy hand. And Abram gave him a tenth of all.
the king of Sodom said to Abram, Give me the men,  take the goods to thyself.
Abram said to the king of Sodom, I have lifted up my hand to Jehovah, God Most High, possessor of heaven and earth,
that I will not take a thread nor a shoe latchet nor anything that is thine, lest thou should say, I have made Abram rich,
except only that which the young men have eaten,  the portion of the men who went with me, Aner, Eshcol,  Mamre. Let them take their portion.
After these things the word of Jehovah came to Abram in a vision, saying, Fear not, Abram. I am thy shield, thy exceedingly great reward.
Abram said, O lord Jehovah, what will thou give me, since I go childless. And he who shall be possessor of my house is Eliezer of Damascus?
Abram said, Behold, thou have given no seed to me. And, lo, a man born in my house is my heir.
And, behold, the word of Jehovah came to him, saying, This man shall not be thine heir,  he who shall come forth out of thine own bowels shall be thine heir.
he brought him forth abroad,  said, Look now toward heaven,  number the stars, if thou be able to number them. And he said to him, So shall thy seed be.
he believed in Jehovah,  he reckoned it to him for righteousness.
he said to him, I am Jehovah who brought thee out of Ur of the Chaldees, to give thee this land to inherit it.
he said, O lord Jehovah, how shall I know that I shall inherit it?
he said to him, Take a heifer three years old for me,  a she-goat three years old,  a ram three years old,  a turtle dove,  a young pigeon.
he took all these for him,  divided them in the midst,  laid each half opposite the other. But he did not divide the birds.
the birds of prey came down upon the carcasses,  Abram drove them away.
when the sun was going down, a deep sleep fell upon Abram. And, lo, a horror of great darkness fell upon him.
he said to Abram, Know of a certainty that thy seed shall be sojourners in a land that is not theirs. And shall serve them,  they shall afflict them four hundred years.
also I will judge that nation, whom they shall serve,  afterward they shall come out with great substance.
But thou will go to thy fathers in peace; thou will be buried in a good old age.
in the fourth generation they shall come here again, for the iniquity of the Amorite is not yet full.
it came to pass, that, when the sun went down,  it was dark, behold, a smoking furnace,  a flaming torch that passed between these pieces.
In that day Jehovah made a covenant with Abram, saying, To thy seed I have given this land, from the river of Egypt to the great river, the river Euphrates:
the Kenite,  the Kenizzite,  the Kadmonite,
the Hittite,  the Perizzite,  the Rephaim,
the Amorite,  the Canaanite,  the Girgashite,  the Jebusite.
Now Sarai, Abram's wife, bore him no sons. And she had a handmaid, an Egyptian, whose name was Hagar.
Sarai said to Abram, Behold now, Jehovah has restrained me from bearing. Go in, I pray thee, to my handmaid. It may be that I will obtain sons by her. And Abram hearkened to the voice of Sarai.
Sarai, Abram's wife, took Hagar the Egyptian, her handmaid, after Abram had dwelt ten years in the land of Canaan,  gave her to Abram her husband to be his wife.
he went in to Hagar,  she conceived. And when she saw that she had conceived, her mistress was despised in her eyes.
Sarai said to Abram, My wrong be upon thee. I gave my handmaid into they bosom,  when she saw that she had conceived, I was despised in her eyes. Jehovah judge between me and thee.
But Abram said to Sarai, Behold, thy maid is in thy hand, do to her that which is good in thine eyes. And Sarai dealt harshly with her,  she fled from her face.
the agent of Jehovah found her by a fountain of water in the wilderness, by the fountain in the way to Shur.
he said, Hagar, Sarai's handmaid, from where have thou come? And where are thou going? And she said, I am fleeing from the face of my mistress Sarai.
the agent of Jehovah said to her, Return to thy mistress,  submit thyself under her hands.
the agent of Jehovah said to her, I will greatly multiply thy seed, that it shall not be numbered for multitude.
the agent of Jehovah said to her, Behold, thou are with child,  shall bear a son,  thou shall call his name Ishmael, because Jehovah has heard thy affliction.
he will be a wild donkey among men, his hand against every man,  every man's hand against him,  he shall dwell in the presence of all his brothers.
she called the name of Jehovah who spoke to her, Thou are a God who sees, for she said, Have I even here looked behind him who sees me?
Therefore the well was called Beer-lahai-roi. Behold, it is between Kadesh and Bered.
Hagar bore Abram a son. And Abram called the name of his son, whom Hagar bore, Ishmael.
Abram was eighty-six years old when Hagar bore Ishmael to Abram.
when Abram was ninety-nine years old, Jehovah appeared to Abram,  said to him, I am God Almighty, walk before me,  be thou perfect.
I will make my covenant between me and thee,  will multiply thee exceedingly.
Abram fell on his face. And God talked with him, saying,
As for me, behold, my covenant is with thee,  thou shall be the father of a multitude of nations.
Neither shall thy name any more be called Abram,  thy name shall be Abraham, for I have made thee the father of a multitude of nations.
I will make thee exceedingly fruitful. And I will make nations of thee,  kings shall come out of thee.
I will establish my covenant between me and thee and thy seed after thee throughout their generations for an everlasting covenant, to be a God to thee and to thy seed after thee.
I will give to thee,  to thy seed after thee, the land of thy sojourning, all the land of Canaan for an everlasting possession,  I will be their God.
God said to Abraham, And as for thee, thou shall keep my covenant, thou,  thy seed after thee throughout their generations.
This is my covenant, which ye shall keep, between me and you and thy seed after thee: every male among you shall be circumcised.
ye shall be circumcised in the flesh of your foreskin,  it shall be a sign of a covenant between me and you.
he who is eight days old shall be circumcised among you, every male throughout your generations: he who is born in the house, or bought with money of any foreigner that is not of thy seed.
He who is born in thy house,  he who is bought with thy money, must be circumcised. And my covenant shall be in your flesh for an everlasting covenant.
the uncircumcised male who is not circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin, that soul shall be cut off from his people; he has broken my covenant.
God said to Abraham, As for Sarai thy wife, thou shall not call her name Sarai,  her name shall be Sarah.
I will bless her. And moreover I will give thee a son by her. Yea, I will bless her,  she shall be a mother of nations; kings of peoples shall be by her.
Then Abraham fell upon his face,  laughed,  said in his heart, Shall a child be born to him who is a hundred years old? And shall Sarah, who is ninety years old, bear?
Abraham said to God, Oh that Ishmael might live before thee!
God said, No,  Sarah thy wife shall bear thee a son,  thou shall call his name Isaac. And I will establish my covenant with him for an everlasting covenant for his seed after him.
as for Ishmael, I have heard thee. Behold, I have blessed him,  will make him fruitful,  will multiply him exceedingly. He shall beget twelve princes,  I will make him a great nation.
But I will establish my covenant with Isaac, whom Sarah shall bear to thee at this set time in the next year.
he left off talking with him,  God went up from Abraham.
Abraham took Ishmael his son,  all who were born in his house,  all who were bought with his money, every male among the men of Abraham's house,  circumcised the flesh of their foreskin in the selfsame day, as God had said to him.
Abraham was ninety-nine years old when he was circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin.
Ishmael his son was thirteen years old when he was circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin.
In the selfsame day Abraham was circumcised,  Ishmael his son.
all the men of his house, those born in the house,  those bought with money from a foreigner, were circumcised with him.
Jehovah appeared to him by the oaks of Mamre, as he sat in the tent door in the heat of the day.
he lifted up his eyes and looked, , lo, three men stood by him. And when he saw them, he ran to meet them from the tent door,  bowed himself to the earth,
said, My lord, if now I have found favor in thy sight, pass not away, I pray thee, from thy servant.
Let now a little water be fetched,  wash your feet,  rest yourselves under the tree.
I will fetch a morsel of bread,  strengthen ye your heart. After that ye shall pass on, inasmuch as ye came to your servant. And they said, Do so as thou have said.
Abraham hastened into the tent to Sarah,  said, Make ready quickly three measures of fine meal, knead it,  make cakes.
Abraham ran to the herd,  fetched a calf tender and good,  gave it to the servant. And he hastened to dress it.
he took butter,  milk,  the calf which he had dressed,  set it before them. And he stood by them under the tree,  they ate.
they said to him, Where is Sarah thy wife? And he said, Behold, in the tent.
he said, I will certainly return to thee when the season comes round, , lo, Sarah thy wife shall have a son. And Sarah heard in the tent door, which was behind him.
Now Abraham and Sarah were old,  well stricken in age. It had ceased to be with Sarah after the manner of women.
Sarah laughed within herself, saying, After I have become old shall I have pleasure, my lord also being old?
Jehovah said to Abraham, Why did Sarah laugh, saying, Shall I who am old certainly bear a child?
Is anything too hard for Jehovah? At the set time I will return to thee, when the season comes round,  Sarah shall have a son.
Then Sarah denied, saying, I did not laugh, for she was afraid. And he said, No,  thou did laugh.
the men rose up from there,  looked toward Sodom. And Abraham went with them to bring them on the way.
Jehovah said, Shall I hide from Abraham that which I do,
since Abraham shall surely become a great and mighty nation,  all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in him?
For I have known him, to the end that he may command his children and his household after him, that they may keep the way of Jehovah, to do righteousness and justice, to the end that Jehovah may bring upon Abraham that which he has spoken of him.
Jehovah said, Because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great,  because their sin is very grievous,
I will go down now,  see whether they have done altogether according to the cry of it, which comes to me. And if not, I will know.
the men turned from there,  went toward Sodom,  Abraham yet stood before Jehovah.
Abraham drew near,  said, Will thou consume righteous men with wicked men?
Perhaps there are fifty righteous men within the city. Will thou consume and not spare the place for the fifty righteous men that are in it?
That be far from thee to do after this manner, to slay a righteous man with a wicked man, that so the righteous man should be as the wicked man. Far be it from thee. Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?
Jehovah said, If I find in Sodom fifty righteous men within the city, then I will spare all the place for their sake.
Abraham answered and said, Behold now, I have taken upon me to speak to the Lord, who am but dust and ashes.
Perhaps there shall lack five of the fifty righteous men. Will thou destroy all the city for lack of five? And he said, I will not destroy it, if I find there forty-five.
he spoke to him yet again,  said, Perhaps there shall be forty found there. And he said, I will not do it for the forty's sake.
he said, Oh let not the Lord be angry,  I will speak. Perhaps there shall be thirty found there. And he said, I will not do it, if I find thirty there.
he said, Behold now, I have taken upon me to speak to the Lord. Perhaps there shall be twenty found there. And he said, I will not destroy it for the twenty's sake.
he said, Oh let not the Lord be angry,  I will speak yet but this once. Perhaps ten shall be found there. And he said, I will not destroy it for the ten's sake.
Jehovah went his way as soon as he had left off conversing with Abraham,  Abraham returned to his place.
the two agents came to Sodom at evening,  Lot sat in the gate of Sodom. And Lot saw them,  rose up to meet them. And he bowed himself with his face to the earth,
he said, Behold now, my lords, turn aside, I pray you, into your servant's house,  tarry all night,  wash your feet,  ye shall rise up early,  go on your way. And they said, No,  we will abide in the street all night.
he urged them greatly. And they turned in to him,  entered into his house. And he made a feast for them,  baked unleavened bread,  they ate.
But before they lay down, the men of the city, the men of Sodom, encompassed the house around, both young and old, all the people from every quarter.
they called to Lot,  said to him, Where are the men who came in to thee this night? Bring them out to us, that we may know them.
Lot went out to them to the door,  shut the door after him.
he said, I pray you, my brothers, do not so wickedly.
Behold now, I have two daughters who have not known a man. Let me, I pray you, bring them out to you,  do ye to them as is good in your eyes. Only do nothing to these men, inasmuch as they have come under the shadow of my roof.
they said, Stand back. And they said, This one fellow came in to sojourn,  he will be a judge. Now we will deal worse with thee, than with them. And they pressed greatly upon the man, even Lot,  drew near to break the door.
But the men put forth their hand,  brought Lot into the house to them,  shut to the door.
they smote the men who were at the door of the house with blindness, both small and great, so that they wearied themselves to find the door.
the men said to Lot, Have thou here any besides? Son-in-law,  thy sons,  thy daughters,  whomever thou have in the city, bring them out of the place.
For we will destroy this place, because the cry of them has been great before Jehovah. And Jehovah has sent us to destroy it.
Lot went out,  spoke to his sons-in-law, who married his daughters,  said, Up, get you out of this place, for Jehovah will destroy the city. But he seemed to his sons-in-law as a man jesting.
when the morning arose, then the agents hurried Lot, saying, Arise, take thy wife,  thy two daughters who are here, lest thou be consumed in the iniquity of the city.
But he lingered. And the men laid hold upon his hand,  upon the hand of his wife,  upon the hand of his two daughters, Jehovah being merciful to him,  they brought him forth,  set him outside the city.
it came to pass, when they had brought them forth abroad, that he said, Escape for thy life, do not look behind thee, neither stay thou in all the Plain. Escape to the mountain, lest thou be consumed.
Lot said to them, Oh, not so, my lord.
Behold now, thy servant has found favor in thy sight,  thou have magnified thy loving kindness, which thou have shown to me in saving my life,  I cannot escape to the mountain, lest evil overtake me,  I die.
Behold now, this city is near to flee to,  it is a little one. Oh let me escape there (is it not a little one?),  my soul shall live.
he said to him, See, I have accepted thee concerning this thing also, that I will not overthrow the city of which thou have spoken.
Hasten thee, escape there, for I cannot do anything till thou have come there. Therefore the name of the city was called Zoar.
The sun was risen upon the earth when Lot came to Zoar.
Then Jehovah rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah brimstone and fire from Jehovah out of heaven.
he overthrew those cities,  all the Plain,  all the inhabitants of the cities,  that which grew upon the ground.
But his wife looked back from behind him,  she became a pillar of salt.
Abraham got up early in the morning to the place where he had stood before Jehovah.
he looked toward Sodom and Gomorrah,  toward all the land of the Plain,  beheld, , lo, the smoke of the land went up as the smoke of a furnace.
it came to pass, when God destroyed the cities of the Plain, that God remembered Abraham,  sent Lot out of the midst of the overthrow, when he overthrew the cities in which Lot dwelt.
Lot went up out of Zoar,  dwelt in the mountain,  his two daughters with him, for he feared to dwell in Zoar. And he dwelt in a cave, he and his two daughters.
the firstborn said to the younger, Our father is old,  there is not a man on the earth to come in to us after the manner of all the earth.
Come, let us make our father drink wine,  we will lie with him, that we may preserve seed by our father.
they made their father drink wine that night. And the firstborn went in,  lay with her father. And he did not know when she lay down, nor when she arose.
it came to pass on the morrow, that the firstborn said to the younger, Behold, I lay last night with my father. Let us make him drink wine this night also,  go thou in,  lie with him, that we may preserve seed by our father.
they made their father drink wine that night also. And the younger arose,  lay with him. And he did not know when she lay down, nor when she arose.
Thus both the daughters of Lot were with child by their father.
the firstborn bore a son,  called his name Moab. The same is the father of the Moabites to this day.
the younger, she also bore a son,  called his name Ben-ammi. The same is the father of the sons of Ammon to this day.
Abraham journeyed from there toward the land of the South,  dwelt between Kadesh and Shur. And he sojourned in Gerar.
Abraham said of Sarah his wife, She is my sister. And Abimelech king of Gerar sent,  took Sarah.
But God came to Abimelech in a dream of the night,  said to him, Behold, thou are but a dead man, because of the woman whom thou have taken, for she is a man's wife.
Now Abimelech had not come near her. And he said, Lord, will thou slay even a righteous nation?
Did he not himself say to me, She is my sister? And she, even she herself said, He is my brother. In the integrity of my heart and the innocence of my hands I have done this.
God said to him in the dream, Yes, I know that in the integrity of thy heart thou have done this. And I also withheld thee from sinning against me. Therefore I did not allow thee to touch her.
Now therefore restore the man's wife. For he is a prophet,  he shall pray for thee,  thou shall live. And if thou do not restore her, know thou that thou shall surely die, thou,  all that are thine.
Abimelech rose early in the morning,  called all his servants,  told all these things in their ear. And the men were exceedingly afraid.
Then Abimelech called Abraham,  said to him, What have thou done to us? And in what have I sinned against thee, that thou have brought on me and on my kingdom a great sin? Thou have done deeds to me that ought not to be done.
Abimelech said to Abraham, What did thou see, that thou have done this thing?
Abraham said, Because I thought, Surely the fear of God is not in this place,  they will kill me because of my wife.
moreover she is indeed my sister, the daughter of my father,  not the daughter of my mother,  she became my wife.
it came to pass, when God caused me to wander from my father's house, that I said to her, This is thy kindness which thou shall show to me. At every place where we shall come, say of me, He is my brother.
Abimelech took sheep and oxen,  men-servants and women-servants,  gave them to Abraham,  restored to him Sarah his wife.
Abimelech said, Behold, my land is before thee. Dwell where it pleases thee.
to Sarah he said, Behold, I have given thy brother a thousand pieces of silver. Behold, it is for thee a covering of the eyes to all who are with thee. And in regard to all thou are righted.
Abraham prayed to God,  God healed Abimelech,  his wife,  his maid-servants. And they bore sons.
For Jehovah had closed up fast all the wombs of the house of Abimelech, because of Sarah, Abraham's wife.
Jehovah visited Sarah as he had said,  Jehovah did to Sarah as he had spoken.
Sarah conceived,  bore Abraham a son in his old age, at the set time of which God had spoken to him.
Abraham called the name of his son who was born to him, whom Sarah bore to him, Isaac.
Abraham circumcised his son Isaac when he was eight days old, as God had commanded him.
Abraham was a hundred years old, when his son Isaac was born to him.
Sarah said, God has made me to laugh. Everyone who hears will laugh with me.
she said, Who would have said to Abraham, that Sarah should give sons suck? For I have borne him a son in his old age.
the child grew,  was weaned. And Abraham made a great feast on the day that Isaac was weaned.
Sarah saw the son of Hagar the Egyptian, whom she had borne to Abraham, mocking.
Therefore she said to Abraham, Cast out this handmaid and her son. For the son of this handmaid shall not be heir with my son, even with Isaac.
the thing was very grievous in Abraham's sight on account of his son.
God said to Abraham, Let it not be grievous in thy sight because of the lad,  because of thy handmaid. In all that Sarah says to thee, hearken to her voice. For in Isaac shall thy seed be called.
also I will make a nation of the son of the handmaid, because he is thy seed.
Abraham rose up early in the morning,  took bread and a bottle of water,  gave it to Hagar, putting it on her shoulder,  the child,  sent her away. And she departed,  wandered in the wilderness of Beersheba.
the water in the bottle was spent,  she cast the child under one of the shrubs.
she went,  sat herself down opposite him a good way off, as it were a bowshot. For she said, Let me not look upon the death of the child. And she sat opposite him,  lifted up her voice,  wept.
God heard the voice of the lad. And the agent of God called to Hagar out of heaven,  said to her, What troubles thee, Hagar? Fear not, for God has heard the voice of the lad where he is.
Arise, lift up the lad,  hold him in thy hand, for I will make him a great nation.
God opened her eyes,  she saw a well of water. And she went,  filled the bottle with water,  gave the lad drink.
God was with the lad,  he grew. And he dwelt in the wilderness,  became, as he grew up, an archer.
he dwelt in the wilderness of Paran. And his mother took for him a wife out of the land of Egypt.
it came to pass at that time, that Abimelech and Phicol the captain of his army spoke to Abraham, saying, God is with thee in all that thou do.
Now therefore swear to me here by God that thou will not deal falsely with me, nor with my son, nor with my son's son. But according to the kindness that I have done to thee, thou shall do to me,  to the land in which thou have sojourned.
Abraham said, I will swear.
Abraham reproved Abimelech because of the well of water which Abimelech's servants had taken away violently.
Abimelech said, I know not who has done this thing, neither did thou tell me, nor yet did I hear of it,  today.
Abraham took sheep and oxen,  gave them to Abimelech. And the two made a covenant.
Abraham set seven ewe lambs of the flock by themselves.
Abimelech said to Abraham, What do these seven ewe lambs mean which thou have set by themselves?
he said, These seven ewe lambs thou shall take from my hand, that it may be a witness to me, that I have dug this well.
Therefore he called that place Beersheba, because there they swore both of them.
So they made a covenant at Beersheba. And Abimelech rose up,  Phicol the captain of his army,  they returned into the land of the Philistines.
Abraham planted a tamarisk tree in Beersheba,  there called on the name of Jehovah, the Everlasting God.
Abraham sojourned in the land of the Philistines many days.
it came to pass after these things, that God proved Abraham,  said to him, Abraham. And he said, Here I am.
he said, Take now thy son, thine only son, whom thou love, even Isaac,  get thee into the land of Moriah. And offer him there for a burnt offering upon one of the mountains which I will tell thee of.
Abraham rose early in the morning,  saddled his donkey,  took two of his young men with him,  Isaac his son. And he split the wood for the burnt offering,  rose up,  went to the place of which God had told him.
On the third day Abraham lifted up his eyes,  saw the place afar off.
Abraham said to his young men, Abide ye here with the donkey,  I and the lad will go yonder,  we will worship,  come again to you.
Abraham took the wood of the burnt offering,  laid it upon Isaac his son. And he took in his hand the fire and the knife. And they went both of them together.
Isaac spoke to Abraham his father,  said, My father. And he said, Here I am, my son. And he said, Behold, the fire and the wood,  where is the lamb for a burnt offering?
Abraham said, God will provide himself the lamb for a burnt offering, my son. So they went both of them together.
they came to the place which God had told him of. And Abraham built the altar there,  laid the wood in order,  bound Isaac his son,  laid him on the altar, upon the wood.
Abraham stretched forth his hand,  took the knife to slay his son.
the agent of Jehovah called to him out of heaven,  said, Abraham, Abraham. And he said, Here I am.
he said, Do not lay thy hand upon the lad, neither do thou anything to him. For now I know that thou fear God, since thou have not withheld thy son, thine only son, from me.
Abraham lifted up his eyes,  looked, , behold, behind him a ram caught in the thicket by his horns. And Abraham went and took the ram,  offered him up for a burnt offering instead of his son.
Abraham called the name of that place Jehovah-jireh. As it is said to this day, In the mount of Jehovah it shall be provided.
the agent of Jehovah called to Abraham a second time out of heaven,
said, By myself I have sworn, says Jehovah, because thou have done this thing,  have not withheld thy son, thine only son,
that in blessing I will bless thee,  in multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the stars of the heavens,  as the sand which is upon the seashore,  thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies,
in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed, because thou have obeyed my voice.
So Abraham returned to his young men. And they rose up and went together to Beersheba. And Abraham dwelt at Beersheba.
it came to pass after these things, that it was told Abraham, saying, Behold, Milcah, she also has borne sons to thy brother Nahor:
Uz his first born,  Buz his brother,  Kemuel the father of Aram,
Chesed,  Hazo,  Pildash,  Jidlaph,  Bethuel.
Bethuel begot Rebekah. These eight Milcah bore to Nahor, Abraham's brother.
his concubine, whose name was Reumah, she also bore Tebah,  Gaham,  Tahash,  Maacah.
the life of Sarah was a hundred and twenty-seven years. These were the years of the life of Sarah.
Sarah died in Kiriath-arba (the same is Hebron), in the land of Canaan. And Abraham came to mourn for Sarah,  to weep for her.
Abraham rose up from before his dead,  spoke to the sons of Heth, saying,
I am a stranger and a sojourner with you. Give me a possession of a burying place with you, that I may bury my dead out of my sight.
the sons of Heth answered Abraham, saying to him,
Hear us, my lord. Thou are a prince of God among us. Bury thy dead in our choice sepulchers. None of us shall withhold from thee his sepulcher,  that thou may bury thy dead.
Abraham rose up,  bowed himself to the people of the land, even to the sons of Heth.
he conversed with them, saying, If it be your mind that I should bury my dead out of my sight, hear me,  entreat for me to Ephron the son of Zohar,
that he may give me the cave of Machpelah, which he has, which is in the end of his field. Let him give it to me for the full price in the midst of you for a possession of a burying place.
Now Ephron was sitting in the midst of the sons of Heth. And Ephron the Hittite answered Abraham in the audience of the sons of Heth, even of all who went in at the gate of his city, saying,
No, my lord, hear me. I give thee the field. And the cave that is in it, I give it to thee. I give it to thee in the presence of the sons of my people. Bury thy dead.
Abraham bowed himself down before the people of the land.
he spoke to Ephron in the audience of the people of the land, saying, But if thou will, I pray thee, hear me. I will give the price of the field. Take it from me,  I will bury my dead there.
Ephron answered Abraham, saying to him,
My lord, hearken to me. A piece of land worth four hundred shekels of silver, what is that between me and thee? Therefore bury thy dead.
Abraham hearkened to Ephron. And Abraham weighed to Ephron the silver that he had named in the audience of the sons of Heth, four hundred shekels of silver, current money with the merchant.
So the field of Ephron, which was in Machpelah, which was before Mamre, the field,  the cave which was in it,  all the trees that were in the field, that were in all the border of it round about, were made sure
to Abraham for a possession in the presence of the sons of Heth, before all who went in at the gate of his city.
after this, Abraham buried Sarah his wife in the cave of the field of Machpelah before Mamre (the same is Hebron), in the land of Canaan.
the field,  the cave that is in it, were made sure to Abraham for a possession of a burying place by the sons of Heth.
Abraham was old, well stricken in age. And Jehovah had blessed Abraham in all things.
Abraham said to his servant, the elder of his house, who ruled over all that he had, Put thy hand, I pray thee, under my thigh.
I will make thee swear by Jehovah, the God of heaven and the God of the earth, that thou will not take a wife for my son of the daughters of the Canaanites, among whom I dwell.
But thou shall go to my country,  to my kindred,  take a wife for my son Isaac.
the servant said to him, Perhaps the woman will not be willing to follow me to this land. Must I bring thy son again to the land from where thou came?
Abraham said to him, Beware thou that thou not bring my son there again.
Jehovah, the God of heaven, who took me from my father's house,  from the land of my nativity,  who spoke to me,  who swore to me, saying, To thy seed I will give this land, he will send his agent before thee,  thou shall take a wife for my son from there.
if the woman be not willing to follow thee, then thou shall be clear from this my oath. Only thou shall not bring my son there again.
the servant put his hand under the thigh of Abraham his master,  swore to him concerning this matter.
the servant took ten camels, of the camels of his master,  departed, having all goodly things of his master's in his hand. And he arose,  went to Mesopotamia, to the city of Nahor.
he made the camels to kneel down outside the city by the well of water at the time of evening, the time that women go out to draw water.
he said, O Jehovah, the God of my master Abraham, send me, I pray thee, good speed this day,  show kindness to my master Abraham.
Behold, I am standing by the fountain of water. And the daughters of the men of the city are coming out to draw water.
let it come to pass, that the damsel to whom I shall say, Let down thy pitcher, I pray thee, that I may drink. And she shall say, Drink,  I will give thy camels drink also. Let the same be she that thou have appointed for thy servant Isaac. And thereby I shall know that thou have shown kindness to my master.
it came to pass, before he was done speaking, that, behold, Rebekah came out, who was born to Bethuel the son of Milcah, the wife of Nahor, Abraham's brother, with her pitcher upon her shoulder.
the damsel was very fair to look upon, a virgin, neither had any man known her. And she went down to the fountain,  filled her pitcher,  came up.
the servant ran to meet her,  said, Give me to drink, I pray thee, a little water from thy pitcher.
she said, Drink, my lord. And she hurried,  let down her pitcher upon her hand,  gave him drink.
when she had finished giving him drink, she said, I will draw for thy camels also, until they have done drinking.
she hurried,  emptied her pitcher into the trough,  ran again to the well to draw,  drew for all his camels.
the man looked steadfastly on her, keeping silent, to know whether Jehovah had made his journey prosperous or not.
it came to pass, as the camels had finished drinking, that the man took a golden ring of half a shekel weight,  two bracelets for her hands of ten shekels weight of gold,
said, Whose daughter are thou? Tell me, I pray thee. Is there room in thy father's house for us to lodge in?
she said to him, I am the daughter of Bethuel the son of Milcah, whom she bore to Nahor.
She said moreover to him, We have both straw and provender enough,  room to lodge in.
the man bowed his head,  worshiped Jehovah.
he said, Blessed be Jehovah, the God of my master Abraham, who has not forsaken his loving kindness and his truth toward my master. As for me, Jehovah has led me in the way to the house of my master's brothers.
the damsel ran,  told her mother's house according to these words.
Rebekah had a brother,  his name was Laban. And Laban ran out to the man, to the fountain.
it came to pass, when he saw the ring,  the bracelets upon his sister's hands,  when he heard the words of Rebekah his sister, saying, Thus spoke the man to me, that he came to the man. And, behold, he was standing by the camels at the fountain.
he said, Come in, thou blessed of Jehovah. Why do thou stand outside? For I have prepared the house,  room for the camels.
the man came into the house,  he ungirded the camels. And he gave straw and provender for the camels,  water to wash his feet and the feet of the men who were with him.
there was set before him food to eat. But he said, I will not eat until I have told my errand. And he said, Speak on.
he said, I am Abraham's servant.
Jehovah has blessed my master greatly,  he has become great. And he has given him flocks and herds,  silver and gold,  men-servants and maid-servants,  camels and donkeys.
Sarah my master's wife bore a son to my master when she was old. And has he given to him all that he has.
my master made me swear, saying, Thou shall not take a wife for my son of the daughters of the Canaanites, in whose land I dwell,
but thou shall go to my father's house,  to my kindred,  take a wife for my son.
I said to my master, Perhaps the woman will not follow me.
he said to me, Jehovah, before whom I walk, will send his agent with thee,  prosper thy way. And thou shall take a wife for my son of my kindred,  of my father's house.
Then thou shall be clear from my oath, when thou come to my kindred. And if they do not give her to thee, thou shall be clear from my oath.
I came this day to the fountain,  said, O Jehovah, the God of my master Abraham, if thou do now prosper my way which I go,
behold, I am standing by the fountain of water,  let it come to pass, that the maiden who comes forth to draw, to whom I shall say, Give me, I pray thee, a little water from thy pitcher to drink,
she shall say to me, Both drink thou,  I will also draw for thy camels, let the same be the woman whom Jehovah has appointed for my master's son.
before I was done speaking in my heart, behold, Rebekah came forth with her pitcher on her shoulder. And she went down to the fountain,  drew. And I said to her, Let me drink, I pray thee.
she made haste,  let down her pitcher from her shoulder,  said, Drink,  I will give thy camels drink also. So I drank,  she made the camels drink also.
I asked her,  said, Whose daughter are thou? And she said, The daughter of Bethuel, Nahor's son, whom Milcah bore to him. And I put the ring upon her nose,  the bracelets upon her hands.
I bowed my head,  worshiped Jehovah,  blessed Jehovah, the God of my master Abraham, who had led me in the right way to take my master's brother's daughter for his son.
now if ye will deal kindly and truly with my master, tell me. And if not, tell me, that I may turn to the right hand, or to the left.
Then Laban and Bethuel answered and said, The thing proceeds from Jehovah; we cannot speak to thee bad or good.
Behold, Rebekah is before thee, take her,  go,  let her be thy master's son's wife, as Jehovah has spoken.
it came to pass, that, when Abraham's servant heard their words, he bowed himself down to the earth to Jehovah.
the servant brought forth jewels of silver,  jewels of gold,  raiment,  gave them to Rebekah. He also gave precious things to her brother and to her mother.
they ate and drank, he and the men who were with him,  tarried all night. And they rose up in the morning,  he said, Send me away to my master.
her brother and her mother said, Let the damsel abide with us a few days, at the least ten. After that she shall go.
he said to them, Do not hinder me, since Jehovah has prospered my way. Send me away that I may go to my master.
they said, We will call the damsel,  inquire at her mouth.
they called Rebekah,  said to her, Will thou go with this man? And she said, I will go.
they sent Rebekah their sister away,  her nurse,  Abraham's servant,  his men.
they blessed Rebekah,  said to her, Our sister, be thou the mother of thousands of ten thousands,  let thy seed possess the gate of those who hate them.
Rebekah arose,  her damsels,  they rode upon the camels,  followed the man. And the servant took Rebekah,  went his way.
Isaac came from the way of Beer-lahai-roi, for he dwelt in the land of the South.
Isaac went out to meditate in the field at the evening. And he lifted up his eyes,  saw, , behold, there were camels coming.
Rebekah lifted up her eyes,  when she saw Isaac, she alighted from the camel.
she said to the servant, What man is this who walks in the field to meet us? And the servant said, It is my master. And she took her veil,  covered herself.
the servant told Isaac all the things that he had done.
Isaac brought her into his mother Sarah's tent,  took Rebekah,  she became his wife,  he loved her. And Isaac was comforted after his mother's death.
Abraham took another wife,  her name was Keturah.
she bore him Zimran,  Jokshan,  Medan,  Midian,  Ishbak,  Shuah.
Jokshan begot Sheba,  Dedan. And the sons of Dedan were Asshurim,  Letushim,  Leummim.
the sons of Midian: Ephah,  Epher,  Hanoch,  Abida,  Eldaah. All these were the sons of Keturah.
Abraham gave all that he had to Isaac.
But to the sons of the concubines, that Abraham had, Abraham gave gifts. And he sent them away from Isaac his son, while he yet lived, eastward, to the east country.
these are the days of the years of Abraham's life which he lived, a hundred seventy-five years.
Abraham gave up the spirit,  died in a good old age, an old man,  full of years,  was gathered to his people.
Isaac and Ishmael his sons buried him in the cave of Machpelah, in the field of Ephron the son of Zohar the Hittite, which is before Mamre,
the field which Abraham purchased from the sons of Heth. There Abraham was buried,  Sarah his wife.
it came to pass after the death of Abraham, that God blessed Isaac his son. And Isaac dwelt by Beer-lahai-roi.
Now these are the generations of Ishmael, Abraham's son, whom Hagar the Egyptian, Sarah's handmaid, bore to Abraham.
these are the names of the sons of Ishmael, by their names, according to their generations: the firstborn of Ishmael, Nebaioth,  Kedar,  Adbeel,  Mibsam,
Mishma,  Dumah,  Massa,
Hadad,  Tema, Jetur, Naphish,  Kedemah.
These are the sons of Ishmael,  these are their names, by their villages,  by their encampments, twelve princes according to their nations.
these are the years of the life of Ishmael, a hundred and thirty-seven years. And he gave up the spirit and died,  was gathered to his people.
they dwelt from Havilah to Shur which is before Egypt, as thou go toward Assyria. He abode opposite all his brothers.
these are the generations of Isaac, Abraham's son: Abraham begot Isaac.
Isaac was forty years old when he took Rebekah, the daughter of Bethuel the Syrian of Paddan-aram, the sister of Laban the Syrian, to be his wife.
Isaac entreated Jehovah for his wife, because she was barren. And Jehovah was entreated by him,  Rebekah his wife conceived.
the children struggled together within her. And she said, If it be so, why do I live? And she went to inquire of Jehovah.
Jehovah said to her, Two nations are in thy womb,  two peoples shall be separated from thy bowels. And the one people shall be stronger than the other people. And the elder shall serve the younger.
when her days to be delivered were fulfilled, behold, there were twins in her womb.
the first came forth red all over like a hairy garment,  they called his name Esau.
after that his brother came forth,  his hand had hold on Esau's heel,  his name was called Jacob. And Isaac was sixty years old when she bore them.
the boys grew. And Esau was a skilful hunter, a man of the field. And Jacob was a quiet man, dwelling in tents.
Now Isaac loved Esau, because he ate of his venison. And Rebekah loved Jacob.
Jacob boiled pottage. And Esau came in from the field,  he was faint.
Esau said to Jacob, Feed me, I pray thee, with that same red pottage, for I am faint. Therefore his name was called Edom.
Jacob said, First sell me thy birthright.
Esau said, Behold, I am about to die,  what profit shall the birthright do to me?
Jacob said, Swear to me first. And he swore to him,  he sold his birthright to Jacob.
Jacob gave Esau bread and pottage of lentils. And he ate and drank,  rose up,  went his way. So Esau despised his birthright.
there was a famine in the land, besides the first famine that was in the days of Abraham. And Isaac went to Abimelech king of the Philistines, to Gerar.
Jehovah appeared to him,  said, Do not go down into Egypt. Dwell in the land which I shall tell thee of.
Sojourn in this land,  I will be with thee,  will bless thee. For to thee,  to thy seed, I will give all these lands,  I will establish the oath that I swore to Abraham thy father.
I will multiply thy seed as the stars of heaven,  will give to thy seed all these lands,  in thy seed all the nations of the earth shall be blessed,
because Abraham obeyed my voice,  kept my order, my commandments, my statutes,  my laws.
Isaac dwelt in Gerar.
the men of the place asked him of his wife. And he said, She is my sister. For he feared to say, My wife, Lest, the men of the place should kill me for Rebekah, because she was fair to look upon.
it came to pass, when he had been there a long time, that Abimelech king of the Philistines looked out at a window,  saw, , behold, Isaac was playing with Rebekah his wife.
Abimelech called Isaac,  said, Behold, she is certainly thy wife,  how did thou say, She is my sister? And Isaac said to him, Because I said, Lest I die because of her.
Abimelech said, What is this thou have done to us? One of the people might easily have lain with thy wife,  thou would have brought guiltiness upon us.
Abimelech ordered all the people, saying, He who touches this man or his wife shall surely be put to death.
Isaac sowed in that land,  found in the same year a hundredfold. And Jehovah blessed him.
the man became great,  grew more and more until he became very great.
he had possessions of flocks,  possessions of herds,  a great household. And the Philistines envied him.
Now all the wells which his father's servants had dug in the days of Abraham his father, the Philistines had stopped,  filled with soil.
Abimelech said to Isaac, Go from us, for thou are much mightier than we.
Isaac departed from there,  encamped in the valley of Gerar,  dwelt there.
Isaac again dug the wells of water, which they had dug in the days of Abraham his father. For the Philistines had stopped them after the death of Abraham. And he called their names after the names by which his father had called them.
Isaac's servants dug in the valley,  found there a well of springing water.
the herdsmen of Gerar strove with Isaac's herdsmen, saying, The water is ours. And he called the name of the well Esek, because they contended with him.
they dug another well,  they strove for that also. And he called the name of it Sitnah.
he moved from there,  dug another well,  they did not strive for that. And he called the name of it Rehoboth. And he said, For now Jehovah has made room for us,  we shall be fruitful in the land.
he went up from there to Beersheba.
Jehovah appeared to him the same night,  said, I am the God of Abraham thy father. Fear not, for I am with thee,  will bless thee,  multiply thy seed for my servant Abraham's sake.
he built an altar there,  called upon the name of Jehovah,  pitched his tent there. And there Isaac's servants dug a well.
Then Abimelech went to him from Gerar,  Ahuzzath his friend,  Phicol the captain of his army.
Isaac said to them, Why have ye come to me, seeing ye hate me,  have sent me away from you?
they said, We saw plainly that Jehovah was with thee. And we said, Let there now be an oath between us, even between us and thee. And let us make a covenant with thee,
that thou will do us no hurt, as we have not touched thee,  as we have done to thee nothing but good,  have sent thee away in peace. Thou are now the blessed of Jehovah.
he made a feast for them,  they ate and drank.
they rose up promptly in the morning,  swore one to another. And Isaac sent them away,  they departed from him in peace.
it came to pass the same day, that Isaac's servants came,  told him concerning the well which they had dug,  said to him, We have found water.
he called it Shibah. Therefore the name of the city is Beersheba to this day.
when Esau was forty years old he took to wife Judith the daughter of Beeri the Hittite,  Basemath the daughter of Elon the Hittite.
they were a bitterness of spirit to Isaac and to Rebekah.
it came to pass, that when Isaac was old,  his eyes were dim, so that he could not see, he called Esau his elder son,  said to him, My son. And he said to him, Here I am.
he said, Behold now, I am old, I know not the day of my death.
Now therefore take, I pray thee, thy weapons, thy quiver and thy bow,  go out to the field,  take venison for me.
make savory food for me, such as I love,  bring it to me, that I may eat, that my soul may bless thee before I die.
Rebekah heard when Isaac spoke to Esau his son. And Esau went to the field to hunt for venison,  to bring it.
Rebekah spoke to Jacob her son, saying, Behold, I heard thy father speak to Esau thy brother, saying,
Bring venison for me,  make savory food for me, that I may eat,  bless thee before Jehovah before my death.
Now therefore, my son, obey my voice according to that which I command thee.
Go now to the flock,  fetch me two good kids of the goats from there. And I will make them savory food for thy father, such as he loves.
thou shall bring it to thy father, that he may eat, so that he may bless thee before his death.
Jacob said to Rebekah his mother, Behold, Esau my brother is a hairy man,  I am a smooth man.
My father will perhaps feel me,  I shall seem to him as a deceiver. And I shall bring a curse upon me,  not a blessing.
his mother said to him, Upon me be thy curse, my son. Only obey my voice,  go fetch them for me.
he went,  fetched,  brought them to his mother. And his mother made savory food, such as his father loved.
Rebekah took the goodly garments of Esau her elder son, which were with her in the house,  put them upon Jacob her younger son.
she put the skins of the kids of the goats upon his hands,  upon the smooth of his neck.
she gave the savory food and the bread, which she had prepared, into the hand of her son Jacob.
he came to his father,  said, My father. And he said, Here I am. Who are thou, my son?
Jacob said to his father, I am Esau thy firstborn. I have done according as thou bade me. Arise, I pray thee, sit and eat of my venison, that thy soul may bless me.
Isaac said to his son, How is it that thou have found it so quickly, my son? And he said, Because Jehovah thy God sent me good speed.
Isaac said to Jacob, Come near, I pray thee, that I may feel thee, my son, whether thou be my very son Esau or not.
Jacob went near to Isaac his father. And he felt him,  said, The voice is Jacob's voice,  the hands are the hands of Esau.
he did not discern him, because his hands were hairy as his brother Esau's hands. So he blessed him.
he said, Are thou my very son Esau? And he said, I am.
he said, Bring it near to me,  I will eat of my son's venison, that my soul may bless thee. And he brought it near to him,  he ate. And he brought wine to him,  he drank.
his father Isaac said to him, Come near now,  kiss me, my son.
he came near,  kissed him. And he smelled the smell of his raiment,  blessed him,  said, See, the smell of my son is as the smell of a field that Jehovah has blessed.
God give thee of the dew of heaven,  of the fatness of the earth,  plenty of grain and new wine.
Let peoples serve thee,  nations bow down to thee. Be lord over thy brothers,  let thy mother's sons bow down to thee. Cursed be he who curses thee,  blessed be he who blesses thee.
it came to pass, as soon as Isaac had made an end of blessing Jacob,  Jacob was yet scarcely gone out from the presence of Isaac his father, that Esau his brother came in from his hunting.
he also made savory food,  brought it to his father. And he said to his father, Let my father arise,  eat of his son's venison, that thy soul may bless me.
Isaac his father said to him, Who are thou? And he said, I am thy son, thy firstborn, Esau.
Isaac trembled very exceedingly,  said, Who then is he who has taken venison,  brought it me,  I have eaten of all before thou came,  have blessed him? Yea, he shall be blessed.
When Esau heard the words of his father, he cried with an exceedingly great and bitter cry,  said to his father, Bless me, even me also, O my father.
he said, Thy brother came with guile,  has taken away thy blessing.
he said, Is not he rightly name Jacob? For he has supplanted me these two times. He took away my birthright, , behold, now he has taken away my blessing. And he said, Have thou not reserved a blessing for me?
Isaac answered and said to Esau, Behold, I have made him thy lord,  all his brothers I have given to him for servants,  I have sustained him with grain and new wine. And what then shall I do for thee, my son?
Esau said to his father, Have thou but one blessing, my father? Bless me, even me also, O my father. And Esau lifted up his voice,  wept.
Isaac his father answered and said to him, Behold, of the fatness of the earth shall be thy dwelling,  of the dew of heaven from above.
by thy sword thou shall live,  thou shall serve thy brother. And it shall come to pass, when thou shall break loose, that thou shall shake his yoke from off thy neck.
Esau hated Jacob because of the blessing with which his father blessed him. And Esau said in his heart, The days of mourning for my father are at hand. Then I will kill my brother Jacob.
the words of Esau her elder son were told to Rebekah. And she sent and called Jacob her younger son,  said to him, Behold, thy brother Esau comforts himself concerning thee, to kill thee.
Now therefore, my son, obey my voice,  arise, flee thou to Laban my brother to Haran.
tarry with him a few days, until thy brother's fury turns away,
until thy brother's anger turns away from thee,  he forgets that which thou have done to him. Then I will send,  fetch thee from there. Why should I be bereaved of you both in one day?
Rebekah said to Isaac, I am weary of my life because of the daughters of Heth. If Jacob takes a wife of the daughters of Heth, such as these, of the daughters of the land, what good shall my life do me?
Isaac called Jacob,  blessed him,  ordered him,  said to him, Thou shall not take a wife of the daughters of Canaan.
Arise, go to Paddan-aram, to the house of Bethuel thy mother's father,  take thee a wife from there of the daughters of Laban thy mother's brother.
God Almighty bless thee,  make thee fruitful,  multiply thee, that thou may be a company of peoples,
give thee the blessing of Abraham, to thee,  to thy seed with thee, that thou may inherit the land of thy sojourning, which God gave to Abraham.
Isaac sent Jacob away. And he went to Paddan-aram to Laban, son of Bethuel the Syrian, the brother of Rebekah, Jacob's and Esau's mother.
Now Esau saw that Isaac had blessed Jacob and sent him away to Paddan-aram, to take for him a wife from there,  that as he blessed him he gave him an order, saying, Thou shall not take a wife of the daughters of Canaan,
that Jacob obeyed his father and his mother,  was gone to Paddan-aram.
Esau saw that the daughters of Canaan did not please Isaac his father.
Esau went to Ishmael,  took, besides the wives that he had, Mahalath the daughter of Ishmael Abraham's son, the sister of Nebaioth, to be his wife.
Jacob went out from Beersheba,  went toward Haran.
he touched upon a certain place,  tarried there all night, because the sun was set. And he took one of the stones of the place,  put it under his head,  lay down in that place to sleep.
he dreamed, , behold, a ladder set up on the earth,  the top of it reached to heaven. And, behold, the agents of God ascending and descending on it.
And, behold, Jehovah stood above it,  said, I am Jehovah, the God of Abraham thy father,  the God of Isaac. The land on which thou lie, to thee I will give it,  to thy seed.
thy seed shall be as the dust of the earth,  thou shall spread abroad to the west,  to the east,  to the north,  to the south. And in thee and in thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed.
And, behold, I am with thee,  will keep thee wherever thou go,  will bring thee again into this land. For I will not leave thee, until I have done that which I have spoken to thee of.
Jacob awoke out of his sleep,  he said, Surely Jehovah is in this place,  I did not know it.
he was afraid,  said, How awesome is this place! This is none other than the house of God,  this is the gate of heaven.
Jacob rose up early in the morning,  took the stone that he had put under his head,  set it up for a pillar,  poured oil upon the top of it.
he called the name of that place Bethel,  the name of the city was Luz at first.
Jacob vowed a vow, saying, If God will be with me,  will keep me in this way that I go,  will give me bread to eat,  raiment to put on,
so that I come again to my father's house in peace,  Jehovah will be my God,
then this stone, which I have set up for a pillar, shall be God's house. And of all that thou shall give me I will surely give the tenth to thee.
Then Jacob went on his journey,  came to the land of the sons of the east.
he looked, , behold, a well in the field. And, lo, three flocks of sheep were lying there by it, for they watered the flocks out of that well. And the stone upon the well's mouth was great.
all the flocks were gathered there. And they rolled the stone from the well's mouth,  watered the sheep,  put the stone again upon the well's mouth in its place.
Jacob said to them, My brothers, where are ye from? And they said, We are of Haran.
he said to them, Do ye know Laban the son of Nahor? And they said, We know him.
he said to them, Is it well with him? And they said, It is well. And, behold, Rachel his daughter comes with the sheep.
he said, Lo, it is yet high day, neither is it time that the cattle should be gathered together. Water ye the sheep,  go and feed them.
they said, We cannot until all the flocks be gathered together,  they roll the stone from the well's mouth. Then we water the sheep.
While he was yet speaking with them, Rachel came with her father's sheep, for she kept them.
it came to pass, when Jacob saw Rachel the daughter of Laban his mother's brother,  the sheep of Laban his mother's brother, that Jacob went near,  rolled the stone from the well's mouth,  watered the flock of Laban his mother's brother.
Jacob kissed Rachel,  lifted up his voice,  wept.
Jacob told Rachel that he was her father's brother,  that he was Rebekah's son. And she ran and told her father.
it came to pass, when Laban heard the news of Jacob his sister's son, that he ran to meet him,  embraced him,  kissed him,  brought him to his house. And he told Laban all these things.
Laban said to him, Surely thou are my bone and my flesh. And he abode with him the space of a month.
Laban said to Jacob, Because thou are my brother, should thou therefore serve me for nothing? Tell me, what shall thy wages be?
Laban had two daughters. The name of the elder was Leah,  the name of the younger was Rachel.
Leah's eyes were weak,  Rachel was beautiful and well favored.
Jacob loved Rachel,  he said, I will serve thee seven years for Rachel thy younger daughter.
Laban said, It is better that I give her to thee, than that I should give her to another man. Abide with me.
Jacob served seven years for Rachel. And they seemed to him but a few days, for the love he had for her.
Jacob said to Laban, Give me my wife, for my days are fulfilled, that I may go in to her.
Laban gathered together all the men of the place,  made a feast.
it came to pass in the evening, that he took Leah his daughter,  brought her to him. And he went in to her.
Laban gave Zilpah his handmaid to his daughter Leah for a handmaid.
it came to pass in the morning that, behold, it was Leah. And he said to Laban, What is this thou have done to me? Did I not serve with thee for Rachel? Why then have thou beguiled me?
Laban said, It is not so done in our place, to give the younger before the firstborn.
Fulfill the week of this one,  we will give thee the other also for the service which thou shall serve with me yet seven other years.
Jacob did so,  fulfilled her week. And he gave him Rachel his daughter to wife.
Laban gave to Rachel, his daughter, Bilhah his handmaid to be her handmaid.
he also went in to Rachel,  also he loved Rachel more than Leah,  served with him yet seven other years.
Jehovah saw that Leah was regarded inferior,  he opened her womb,  Rachel was barren.
Leah conceived,  bore a son,  she called his name Reuben. For she said, Because Jehovah has looked upon my affliction, for now my husband will love me.
she conceived again,  bore a son,  said, Because Jehovah has heard that I am regarded inferior, he has therefore given me this son also. And she called his name Simeon.
she conceived again,  bore a son,  said, Now this time my husband will be joined to me, because I have borne him three sons. Therefore his name was called Levi.
she conceived again,  bore a son. And she said, This time I will praise Jehovah. Therefore she called his name Judah. And she left off bearing.
when Rachel saw that she bore Jacob no sons, Rachel envied her sister,  she said to Jacob, Give me sons, or else I die.
Jacob's anger was kindled against Rachel,  he said, Am I in God's stead, who has withheld from thee the fruit of the womb?
she said, Behold, my maid Bilhah, go in to her, that she may bear upon my knees,  I also may obtain sons by her.
she gave him Bilhah her handmaid to wife,  Jacob went in to her.
Bilhah conceived,  bore Jacob a son.
Rachel said, God has judged me,  has also heard my voice,  has given me a son. Therefore she called his name Dan.
Bilhah Rachel's handmaid conceived again,  bore Jacob a second son.
Rachel said, With mighty wrestlings have I wrestled with my sister,  have prevailed. And she called his name Naphtali.
When Leah saw that she had left off bearing, she took Zilpah her handmaid,  gave her to Jacob to wife.
Zilpah Leah's handmaid bore Jacob a son.
Leah said, Fortunate! And she called his name Gad.
Zilpah Leah's handmaid bore Jacob a second son.
Leah said, Happy am I! For the daughters will call me happy. And she called his name Asher.
Reuben went in the days of wheat harvest,  found mandrakes in the field,  brought them to his mother Leah. Then Rachel said to Leah, Give me, I pray thee, of thy son's mandrakes.
she said to her, Is it a small matter that thou have taken away my husband? And would thou take away my son's mandrakes also? And Rachel said, Therefore he shall lie with thee tonight for thy son's mandrakes.
Jacob came from the field in the evening,  Leah went out to meet him,  said, Thou must come in to me, for I have surely hired thee with my son's mandrakes. And he lay with her that night.
God hearkened to Leah,  she conceived,  bore Jacob a fifth son.
Leah said, God has given me my hire, because I gave my handmaid to my husband. And she called his name Issachar.
Leah conceived again,  bore a sixth son to Jacob.
Leah said, God has endowed me with a good dowry. Now my husband will dwell with me, because I have borne him six sons. And she called his name Zebulun.
afterwards she bore a daughter,  called her name Dinah.
God remembered Rachel. And God hearkened to her,  opened her womb.
she conceived,  bore a son,  said, God has taken away my reproach.
she called his name Joseph, saying, Jehovah adds another son to me.
it came to pass, when Rachel had borne Joseph, that Jacob said to Laban, Send me away, that I may go to my own place,  to my country.
Give me my wives and my children for whom I have served thee,  let me go, for thou know my service with which I have served thee.
Laban said to him, If now I have found favor in thine eyes, tarry, for I have learned by experience that Jehovah has blessed me for thy sake.
he said, Appoint for me thy wages,  I will give it.
he said to him, Thou know how I have served thee,  how thy cattle have fared with me.
For it was little which thou had before I came,  it has increased to a multitude,  Jehovah has blessed thee wherever I turned. And now when shall I provide for my own house also?
he said, What shall I give thee? And Jacob said, Thou shall not give me anything. If thou will do this thing for me, I will again feed thy flock and keep it.
I will pass through all thy flock today, removing from there every speckled and spotted one,  every black one among the sheep,  the spotted and speckled among the goats,  of such shall be my hire.
So shall my righteousness answer for me after this, when thou shall come concerning my hire that is before thee. Every one that is not speckled and spotted among the goats,  black among the sheep, that is with me, shall be considered stolen.
Laban said, Behold, O that it might be according to thy word.
he removed that day the he-goats that were ringstreaked and spotted,  all the she-goats that were speckled and spotted, every one that had white in it,  all the black ones among the sheep,  gave them into the hand of his sons.
he set three days' journey between himself and Jacob. And Jacob fed the rest of Laban's flocks.
Jacob took for him rods of fresh poplar,  of the almond and of the plane tree,  peeled white streaks in them,  made the white which was in the rods appear.
he set the rods which he had peeled before the flocks in the gutters in the watering troughs where the flocks came to drink. And they conceived when they came to drink.
the flocks conceived before the rods,  the flocks brought forth ringstreaked, speckled,  spotted.
Jacob separated the lambs,  set the faces of the flocks toward the ringstreaked and all the black in the flock of Laban. And he put his own herds apart,  did not put them near Laban's flock.
it came to pass, whenever the stronger of the flock conceived, that Jacob laid the rods before the eyes of the flock in the gutters, that they might conceive among the rods,
but when the flock were weak, he did not put them in. So the weaker were Laban's,  the stronger Jacob's.
the man increased exceedingly,  had large flocks,  maid-servants and men-servants,  camels and donkeys.
he heard the words of Laban's sons, saying, Jacob has taken away all that was our father's,  he has gotten all this glory of that which was our father's.
Jacob beheld the countenance of Laban, , behold, it was not toward him as beforetime.
Jehovah said to Jacob, Return to the land of thy fathers,  to thy kindred,  I will be with thee.
Jacob sent and called Rachel and Leah to the field to his flock,
said to them, I see your father's countenance, that it is not toward me as beforetime,  the God of my father has been with me.
ye know that with all my power I have served your father.
your father has deceived me,  changed my wages ten times,  God did not allow him to hurt me.
If he said thus, The speckled shall be thy wages, then all the flock bore speckled,  if he said thus, The ringstreaked shall be thy wages, then all the flock bore ringstreaked.
Thus God has taken away the cattle of your father,  given them to me.
it came to pass at the time that the flock conceive, that I lifted up my eyes,  saw in a dream, , behold, the he-goats which leaped upon the flock were ringstreaked, speckled,  grizzled.
the agent of God said to me in the dream, Jacob. And I said, Here I am.
he said, Lift up now thine eyes,  see, all the he-goats which leap upon the flock are ringstreaked, speckled,  grizzled, for I have seen all that Laban does to thee.
I am the God of Bethel, where thou anointed a pillar, where thou vowed a vow to me. Now arise, get thee out from this land,  return to the land of thy nativity.
Rachel and Leah answered and said to him, Is there yet any portion or inheritance for us in our father's house?
Are we not accounted by him as foreigners? For he has sold us,  has also quite devoured our money.
For all the riches which God has taken away from our father, that is ours and our children's. Now then, whatever God has said to thee, do.
Then Jacob rose up,  set his sons and his wives upon the camels.
he carried away all his cattle,  all his substance which he had gathered, the cattle of his getting, which he had gathered in Paddan-aram, to go to Isaac his father to the land of Canaan.
Now Laban was gone to shear his sheep,  Rachel stole the teraphim that were her father's.
Jacob slipped away unawares to Laban the Syrian, in that he did not tell him that he fled.
So he fled with all that he had. And he rose up,  passed over the River,  set his face toward the mountain of Gilead.
it was told Laban on the third day that Jacob had fled.
he took his brothers with him,  pursued after him seven days' journey,  he overtook him in the mountain of Gilead.
God came to Laban the Syrian in a dream of the night,  said to him, Take heed to thyself that thou not speak to Jacob either good or bad.
Laban came up with Jacob. Now Jacob had pitched his tent in the mountain. And Laban encamped with his brothers in the mountain of Gilead.
Laban said to Jacob, What have thou done, that thou have slipped away unawares to me,  carried away my daughters as captives of the sword?
Why did thou flee secretly,  creep away from me,  did not tell me, that I might have sent thee away with mirth and with songs, with tambourine and with harp,
did not allow me to kiss my sons and my daughters? Now thou have done foolishly.
It is in the power of my hand to do you harm,  the God of your father spoke to me last night, saying, Take heed to thyself that thou not speak to Jacob either good or bad.
now, though thou have certainly gone, because thou have been very desirous for thy father's house, yet why have thou stolen my gods?
Jacob answered and said to Laban, Because I was afraid, for I said, Lest thou should take thy daughters from me by force.
With whomever thou find thy gods, he shall not live. Before our brothers discern thou what is thine with me,  take it to thee. For Jacob did not know that Rachel had stolen them.
Laban went into Jacob's tent,  into Leah's tent,  into the tent of the two maid-servants,  he did not find them. And he went out of Leah's tent,  entered into Rachel's tent.
Now Rachel had taken the teraphim,  put them in the camel's saddle,  sat upon them. And Laban felt around all the tent,  did not find them.
she said to her father, Let not my lord be angry that I cannot rise up before thee, for the manner of women is upon me. And he searched,  did not find the teraphim.
Jacob was angry,  chided with Laban. And Jacob answered and said to Laban, What is my trespass? What is my sin that thou have hotly pursued after me?
Whereas thou have felt around all my stuff, what have thou found of all thy household stuff? Set it here before my brothers and thy brothers, that they may judge between us two.
These twenty years I have been with thee, thy ewes and thy she-goats have not cast their young,  I have not eaten the rams of thy flocks.
I did not bring to thee that which was torn by beasts; I bore the loss of it, of my hand thou required it, whether stolen by day or stolen by night.
Thus I was; in the day the drought consumed me,  the frost by night,  my sleep fled from my eyes.
These twenty years I have been in thy house. I served thee fourteen years for thy two daughters,  six years for thy flock. And thou have changed my wages ten times.
Unless the God of my father, the God of Abraham,  the fear of Isaac, had been with me, surely now thou would have sent me away empty. God has seen my affliction and the labor of my hands,  rebuked thee last night.
Laban answered and said to Jacob, The daughters are my daughters,  the sons are my sons,  the flocks are my flocks,  all that thou see is mine. And what can I do this day to these my daughters, or to their sons whom they have borne?
now come, let us make a covenant, I and thou,  let it be for a witness between me and thee.
Jacob took a stone,  set it up for a pillar.
Jacob said to his brothers, Gather stones,  they took stones,  made a heap. And they ate there by the heap.
Laban called it Jegar-saha-dutha,  Jacob called it Galeed.
Laban said, This heap is witness between me and thee this day. Therefore the name of it was called Galeed,
Mizpah. For he said, May Jehovah watch between me and thee, when we are absent one from another,
if thou will afflict my daughters,  if thou will take wives besides my daughters, no man is with us, see, God is witness between me and thee.
Laban said to Jacob, Behold this heap,  behold the pillar, which I have set between me and thee.
This heap is witness,  the pillar is witness, that I will not pass over this heap to thee,  that thou shall not pass over this heap and this pillar to me, for harm.
The God of Abraham,  the God of Nahor, the God of their father, judge between us. And Jacob swore by the fear of his father Isaac.
Jacob offered a sacrifice on the mountain,  called his brothers to eat bread. And they ate bread,  tarried all night on the mountain.
early in the morning Laban rose up,  kissed his sons and his daughters,  blessed them. And Laban departed and returned to his place.
Jacob went on his way,  the agents of God met him.
Jacob said when he saw them, This is God's camp. And he called the name of that place Mahanaim.
Jacob sent messengers before him to Esau his brother to the land of Seir, the field of Edom.
he commanded them, saying, Thus shall ye say to my lord Esau, Thus says thy servant Jacob, I have sojourned with Laban,  stayed until now.
I have oxen,  donkeys, flocks,  men-servants,  maid-servants. And I have sent to tell my lord, that I may find favor in thy sight.
the messengers returned to Jacob, saying, We came to thy brother Esau,  moreover he comes to meet thee,  four hundred men with him.
Then Jacob was greatly afraid and was distressed. And he divided the people that were with him,  the flocks,  the herds,  the camels, into two companies.
he said, If Esau comes to the one company,  smites it, then the company which is left shall escape.
Jacob said, O God of my father Abraham,  God of my father Isaac, O Jehovah, who said to me, Return to thy country,  to thy kindred,  I will do thee good,
I am not worthy of the least of all the loving kindnesses,  of all the truth, which thou have shown to thy servant, for with my staff I passed over this Jordan,  now I have become two companies.
Deliver me, I pray thee, from the hand of my brother, from the hand of Esau. For I fear him, lest he comes and smites me, the mother with the sons.
thou said, I will surely do thee good,  make thy seed as the sand of the sea, which cannot be numbered for multitude.
he lodged there that night,  took of that which he had with him a present for Esau his brother:
two hundred she-goats and twenty he-goats, two hundred ewes and twenty rams,
thirty milk camels and their colts, forty cows and ten bulls, twenty she-donkeys and ten foals.
he delivered them into the hand of his servants, every herd by itself,  said to his servants, Pass over before me,  put a space between herd and herd.
he commanded the foremost, saying, When Esau my brother meets thee,  asks thee, saying, Whose are thou? And where do thou go? And whose are these before thee?
Then thou shall say, Thy servant Jacob's. It is a present sent to my lord Esau. And, behold, he also is behind us.
he commanded also the second,  the third,  all who followed the herds, saying, On this manner shall ye speak to Esau when ye find him,
ye shall say, Moreover, behold, thy servant Jacob is behind us. For he said, I will appease him with the present that goes before me,  afterward I will see his face. Perhaps he will accept me.
So the present passed over before him,  he himself lodged that night in the company.
he rose up that night,  took his two wives,  his two handmaids,  his eleven sons,  passed over the ford of the Jabbok.
he took them,  sent them over the stream,  sent over that which he had.
Jacob was left alone,  a man wrestled with him until the breaking of the day.
when he saw that he did not prevail against him, he touched the hollow of his thigh,  the hollow of Jacob's thigh was strained as he wrestled with him.
he said, Let me go, for the day breaks. And he said, I will not let thee go unless thou bless me.
he said to him, What is thy name? And he said, Jacob.
he said, Thy name shall no more be called Jacob,  Israel, for thou have striven with God and with men,  have prevailed.
Jacob asked him,  said, Tell me, I pray thee, thy name. And he said, Why is it that thou ask for my name? And he blessed him there.
Jacob called the name of the place Peniel, for, I have seen God face to face,  my life is preserved.
the sun rose upon him as he passed over Penuel,  he limped upon his thigh.
Therefore the sons of Israel do not eat the sinew of the hip which is upon the hollow of the thigh, to this day, because he touched the hollow of Jacob's thigh in the sinew of the hip.
Jacob lifted up his eyes,  looked, , behold, Esau was coming,  four hundred men with him. And he divided the children to Leah,  to Rachel,  to the two handmaids.
he put the handmaids and their children foremost,  Leah and her children after,  Rachel and Joseph hindmost.
he himself passed over before them,  bowed himself to the ground seven times, until he came near to his brother.
Esau ran to meet him,  embraced him,  fell on his neck,  kissed him,  they wept.
he lifted up his eyes,  saw the women and the children,  said, Who are these with thee? And he said, The children whom God has graciously given thy servant.
Then the handmaids came near, they and their children,  they bowed themselves.
Leah also and her children came near,  bowed themselves. And afterward Joseph came near and Rachel,  they bowed themselves.
he said, What do thou mean by all this company which I met? And he said, To find favor in the sight of my lord.
Esau said, I have enough, my brother, let that which thou have be thine.
Jacob said, No, I pray thee, if now I have found favor in thy sight, then receive my present at my hand, inasmuch as I have seen thy face, as any man would see the face of God,  thou were pleased with me.
Take, I pray thee, my gift that is brought to thee, because God has dealt graciously with me,  because I have enough. And he urged him,  he took it.
he said, Let us take our journey,  let us go,  I will go before thee.
he said to him, My lord knows that the children are tender,  that the flocks and herds with me have their young,  if they overdrive them one day, all the flocks will die.
Let my lord, I pray thee, pass over before his servant,  I will lead on gently, according to the pace of the cattle that are before me and according to the pace of the children, until I come to my lord to Seir.
Esau said, Let me now leave with thee some of the folks that are with me. And he said, What need is it? Let me find favor in the sight of my lord.
So Esau returned that day on his way to Seir.
Jacob journeyed to Succoth,  built for him a house,  made booths for his cattle. Therefore the name of the place is called Succoth.
Jacob came in peace to the city of Shechem, which is in the land of Canaan, when he came from Paddan-aram,  encamped before the city.
he bought the parcel of ground, where he had spread his tent, at the hand of the sons of Hamor, Shechem's father, for a hundred lambs.
he erected an altar there,  called it El-Elohe-Israel.
Dinah the daughter of Leah, whom she bore to Jacob, went out to see the daughters of the land.
Shechem the son of Hamor the Hivite, the prince of the land, saw her. And he took her,  lay with her,  humbled her.
his soul clung to Dinah the daughter of Jacob,  he loved the damsel,  spoke kindly to the damsel.
Shechem spoke to his father Hamor, saying, Get me this damsel to wife.
Now Jacob heard that he had defiled Dinah his daughter. And his sons were with his cattle in the field,  Jacob held his peace until they came.
Hamor the father of Shechem went out to Jacob to converse with him.
the sons of Jacob came in from the field when they heard it. And the men were grieved,  they were very angry, because he had wrought folly in Israel in lying with Jacob's daughter, which thing ought not to be done.
Hamor conversed with them, saying, The soul of my son Shechem longs for your daughter. I pray you, give her to him to wife.
make ye marriages with us; give your daughters to us,  take our daughters to you.
ye shall dwell with us,  the land shall be before you. Dwell and trade ye in it,  get possessions for you in it.
Shechem said to her father and to her brothers, Let me find favor in your eyes,  what ye shall say to me I will give.
Ask me never so much dowry and gift,  I will give according as ye shall say to me,  give me the damsel to wife.
the sons of Jacob answered Shechem and Hamor his father with guile,  spoke, because he had defiled Dinah their sister,
said to them, We cannot do this thing, to give our sister to a man who is uncircumcised, for that is a reproach to us.
Only on this condition will we consent to you: If ye will be as we are, that every male of you be circumcised.
Then we will give our daughters to you,  we will take your daughters to us. And we will dwell with you,  we will become one people.
But if ye will not hearken to us, to be circumcised, then will we take our daughter,  we will be gone.
their words pleased Hamor,  Shechem Hamor's son.
the young man did not delay to do the thing, because he had delight in Jacob's daughter. And he was honored above all the house of his father.
Hamor and Shechem his son came to the gate of their city,  conversed with the men of their city, saying,
These men are peaceable with us, therefore let them dwell in the land,  trade in it, for, behold, the land is large enough for them. Let us take their daughters to us for wives,  let us give them our daughters.
Only on this condition will the men consent to us to dwell with us, to become one people, if every male among us be circumcised, as they are circumcised.
Shall not their cattle and their substance and all their beasts be ours? Only let us consent to them,  they will dwell with us.
all who went out of the gate of his city hearkened to Hamor and to Shechem his son,  every male was circumcised, all who went out of the gate of his city.
it came to pass on the third day, when they were sore, that two of the sons of Jacob, Simeon and Levi, Dinah's brothers, took each man his sword,  came upon the city unawares,  killed all the males.
they killed Hamor and Shechem his son with the edge of the sword,  took Dinah out of Shechem's house,  went forth.
The sons of Jacob came upon the slain,  plundered the city, because they had defiled their sister.
They took their flocks and their herds and their donkeys,  that which was in the city,  that which was in the field,
all their wealth,  all their little ones and their wives, they took captive and made a prey, even all that was in the house.
Jacob said to Simeon and Levi, Ye have troubled me, to make me odious to the inhabitants of the land, among the Canaanites and the Perizzites. And, I being few in number, they will gather themselves together against me and smite me,  I shall be destroyed, I and my house.
they said, Should he deal with our sister as with a harlot?
God said to Jacob, Arise, go up to Bethel,  dwell there,  make an altar there to God, who appeared to thee when thou fled from the face of Esau thy brother.
Then Jacob said to his household,  to all who were with him, Put away the foreign gods that are among you,  purify yourselves,  change your garments.
let us arise,  go up to Bethel,  I will make there an altar to God, who answered me in the day of my distress,  was with me on the way which I went.
they gave to Jacob all the foreign gods which were in their hand,  the rings which were in their ears. And Jacob hid them under the oak that was by Shechem.
they journeyed,  a terror of God was upon the cities that were round about them,  they did not pursue after the sons of Jacob.
So Jacob came to Luz, which is in the land of Canaan (the same is Bethel), he and all the people that were with him.
he built there an altar,  called the place El-bethel, because God was revealed to him there, when he fled from the face of his brother.
Deborah Rebekah's nurse died,  she was buried below Bethel under the oak. And the name of it was called Allon-bacuth.
God appeared to Jacob again, when he came from Paddan-aram,  blessed him.
God said to him, Thy name is Jacob. Thy name shall not be called any more Jacob,  Israel shall be thy name. And he called his name Israel.
God said to him, I am God Almighty. Be fruitful and multiply. A nation and a company of nations shall be of thee,  kings shall come out of thy loins.
the land which I gave to Abraham and Isaac, I will give it to thee,  I will give the land to thy seed after thee.
God went up from him in the place where he spoke with him.
Jacob set up a pillar in the place where he spoke with him, a pillar of stone. And he poured out a drink offering on it,  poured oil on it.
Jacob called the name of the place where God spoke with him, Bethel.
they journeyed from Bethel. And there was still some distance to come to Ephrath,  Rachel travailed,  she had hard labor.
it came to pass, when she was in hard labor, that the midwife said to her, Fear not, for now thou shall have another son.
it came to pass, as her soul was departing (for she died), that she called his name Ben-oni,  his father called him Benjamin.
Rachel died,  was buried on the way to Ephrath (the same is Bethlehem).
Jacob set up a pillar upon her grave, the same is the Pillar of Rachel's grave to this day.
Israel journeyed,  spread his tent beyond the tower of Eder.
it came to pass, while Israel dwelt in that land, that Reuben went and lay with Bilhah his father's concubine,  Israel heard of it. Now the sons of Jacob were twelve.
The sons of Leah: Reuben, Jacob's firstborn,  Simeon,  Levi,  Judah,  Issachar,  Zebulun.
The sons of Rachel: Joseph and Benjamin.
the sons of Bilhah, Rachel's handmaid: Dan and Naphtali.
the sons of Zilpah, Leah's handmaid: Gad and Asher. These are the sons of Jacob, who were born to him in Paddan-aram.
Jacob came to Isaac his father to Mamre, to Kiriath-arba (the same is Hebron), where Abraham and Isaac sojourned.
the days of Isaac were a hundred and eighty years.
Isaac gave up the spirit,  died,  was gathered to his people, old and full of days. And Esau and Jacob his sons buried him.
Now these are the generations of Esau (the same is Edom).
Esau took his wives of the daughters of Canaan: Adah the daughter of Elon the Hittite,  Oholibamah the daughter of Anah, the daughter of Zibeon the Hivite,
Basemath Ishmael's daughter, sister of Nebaioth.
Adah bore to Esau Eliphaz,  Basemath bore Reuel,
Oholibamah bore Jeush,  Jalam,  Korah. These are the sons of Esau, who were born to him in the land of Canaan.
Esau took his wives,  his sons,  his daughters,  all the souls of his house,  his cattle,  all his beasts,  all his possessions, which he had gathered in the land of Canaan,  went into a land away from his brother Jacob.
For their substance was too great for them to dwell together,  the land of their sojourning could not bear them because of their cattle.
Esau dwelt in mount Seir. Esau is Edom.
these are the generations of Esau the father of the Edomites in mount Seir:
These are the names of Esau's sons: Eliphaz the son of Adah the wife of Esau, Reuel the son of Basemath the wife of Esau.
the sons of Eliphaz were Teman, Omar, Zepho,  Gatam,  Kenaz.
Timna was concubine to Eliphaz Esau's son,  she bore to Eliphaz Amalek. These are the sons of Adah, Esau's wife.
these are the sons of Reuel: Nahath,  Zerah, Shammah,  Mizzah, These were the sons of Basemath, Esau's wife.
these were the sons of Oholibamah the daughter of Anah, the daughter of Zibeon, Esau's wife: and she bore to Esau Jeush,  Jalam,  Korah.
These are the chiefs of the sons of Esau: The sons of Eliphaz the firstborn of Esau: chief Teman, chief Omar, chief Zepho, chief Kenaz,
chief Korah, chief Gatam, chief Amalek. These are the chiefs that came by Eliphaz in the land of Edom. These are the sons of Adah.
these are the sons of Reuel, Esau's son: chief Nahath, chief Zerah, chief Shammah, chief Mizzah. These are the chiefs that came by Reuel in the land of Edom. These are the sons of Basemath, Esau's wife.
these are the sons of Oholibamah, Esau's wife: chief Jeush, chief Jalam, chief Korah. These are the chiefs that came by Oholibamah the daughter of Anah, Esau's wife.
These are the sons of Esau,  these are their chiefs. The same is Edom.
These are the sons of Seir the Horite, the inhabitants of the land: Lotan and Shobal and Zibeon and Anah,
Dishon and Ezer and Dishan. These are the chiefs that came of the Horites, the sons of Seir in the land of Edom.
the sons of Lotan were Hori and Heman. And Lotan's sister was Timna.
these are the sons of Shobal: Alvan and Manahath and Ebal, Shepho and Onam.
these are the sons of Zibeon: Aiah and Anah. This is Anah who found the hot springs in the wilderness, as he fed the donkeys of Zibeon his father.
these are the children of Anah: Dishon,  Oholibamah the daughter of Anah.
these are the sons of Dishon: Hemdan and Eshban and Ithran and Cheran.
These are the sons of Ezer: Bilhan and Zaavan and Akan.
These are the sons of Dishan: Uz and Aran.
These are the chiefs that came from the Horites: chief Lotan, chief Shobal, chief Zibeon, chief Anah,
chief Dishon, chief Ezer, chief Dishan. These are the chiefs that came from the Horites, according to their chiefs in the land of Seir.
these are the kings that reigned in the land of Edom, before any king reigned over the sons of Israel.
Bela the son of Beor reigned in Edom,  the name of his city was Dinhabah.
Bela died,  Jobab the son of Zerah of Bozrah reigned in his stead.
Jobab died,  Husham of the land of the Temanites reigned in his stead.
Husham died,  Hadad the son of Bedad, who smote Midian in the field of Moab, reigned in his stead. And the name of his city was Avith.
Hadad died,  Samlah of Masrekah reigned in his stead.
Samlah died,  Shaul of Rehoboth by the River reigned in his stead.
Shaul died,  Baal-hanan the son of Achbor reigned in his stead.
Baal-hanan the son of Achbor died,  Hadar reigned in his stead. And the name of his city was Pau,  his wife's name was Mehetabel, the daughter of Matred, the daughter of Me-zahab.
these are the names of the chiefs that came of Esau, according to their families, after their places, by their names: chief Timnah, chief Alvah, chief Jetheth,
chief Aholibamah, chief Elah, chief Pinon,
chief Kenaz, chief Teman, chief Mibzar,
chief Magdiel, chief Iram. These are the chiefs of Edom, according to their habitations in the land of their possession. This is Esau, the father of the Edomites.
Jacob dwelt in the land of his father's sojourning, in the land of Canaan.
These are the generations of Jacob. Joseph, being seventeen years old, was feeding the flock with his brothers. And he was a lad with the sons of Bilhah,  with the sons of Zilpah, his father's wives,  Joseph brought the evil report of them to their father.
Now Israel loved Joseph more than all his sons, because he was the son of his old age. And he made for him a coat of many colors.
his brothers saw that their father loved him more than all his brothers. And they hated him,  could not speak peaceably to him.
Joseph dreamed a dream,  he told it to his brothers,  they hated him yet the more.
he said to them, Hear, I pray you, this dream which I have dreamed.
For, behold, we were binding sheaves in the field, , lo, my sheaf arose,  also stood upright. And, behold, your sheaves came round about,  made obeisance to my sheaf.
his brothers said to him, Shall thou indeed reign over us? Or shall thou indeed have dominion over us? And they hated him yet the more for his dreams,  for his words.
he dreamed yet another dream,  told it to his brothers. And said, Behold, I have dreamed a dream again. And, behold, the sun and the moon and eleven stars made obeisance to me.
he told it to his father,  to his brothers. And his father rebuked him,  said to him, What is this dream that thou have dreamed? Shall I and thy mother and thy brothers indeed come to bow down ourselves to thee to the earth?
his brothers envied him,  his father kept the saying in mind.
his brothers went to feed their father's flock in Shechem.
Israel said to Joseph, Are not thy brothers feeding the flock in Shechem? Come,  I will send thee to them. And he said to him, Here I am.
he said to him, Go now, see whether it is well with thy brothers,  well with the flock,  bring me word again. So he sent him out of the valley of Hebron,  he came to Shechem.
a certain man found him, , behold, he was wandering in the field. And the man asked him, saying, What do thou seek?
he said, I am seeking my brothers. Tell me, I pray thee, where they are feeding.
the man said, They are departed from here, for I heard them say, Let us go to Dothan. And Joseph went after his brothers,  found them in Dothan.
they saw him afar off. And before he came near to them, they conspired against him to kill him.
they said one to another, Behold, this dreamer comes.
Come now therefore,  let us kill him,  cast him into one of the pits. And we will say, An evil beast has devoured him. And we shall see what will become of his dreams.
Reuben heard it,  delivered him out of their hand,  said, Let us not take his life.
Reuben said to them, Shed no blood. Cast him into this pit that is in the wilderness,  lay no hand upon him, that he might deliver him out of their hand, to restore him to his father.
it came to pass, when Joseph came to his brothers, that they stripped Joseph of his coat, the coat of many colors that was on him,
they took him,  cast him into the pit. And the pit was empty; there was no water in it.
they sat down to eat bread. And they lifted up their eyes and looked, , behold, a caravan of Ishmaelites was coming from Gilead, with their camels bearing spicery and balm and myrrh, going to carry it down to Egypt.
Judah said to his brothers, What profit is it if we kill our brother and conceal his blood?
Come,  let us sell him to the Ishmaelites,  let not our hand be upon him, for he is our brother, our flesh. And his brothers hearkened to him.
there passed by Midianites, merchantmen,  they drew and lifted Joseph up out of the pit,  sold Joseph to the Ishmaelites for twenty pieces of silver. And they brought Joseph into Egypt.
Reuben returned to the pit, , behold, Joseph was not in the pit. And he tore his clothes,
he returned to his brothers,  said, The child is not,  I, where shall I go?
they took Joseph's coat,  killed a he-goat,  dipped the coat in the blood.
they sent the coat of many colors,  they brought it to their father,  said, We have found this. Know now whether it is thy son's coat or not.
he knew it,  said, It is my son's coat. An evil beast has devoured him; Joseph is without doubt torn in pieces.
Jacob tore his garments,  put sackcloth upon his loins,  mourned for his son many days.
all his sons and all his daughters rose up to comfort him,  he refused to be comforted,  he said, For I will go down to Sheol to my son mourning. And his father wept for him.
the Midianites sold him into Egypt to Potiphar, an officer of Pharaoh's, the captain of the guard.
it came to pass at that time, that Judah went down from his brothers,  turned in to a certain Adullamite, whose name was Hirah.
Judah saw there a daughter of a certain Canaanite whose name was Shua. And he took her,  went in to her.
she conceived,  bore a son,  he called his name Er.
she conceived again,  bore a son,  she called his name Onan.
she yet again bore a son,  called his name Shelah. And he was at Chezib, when she bore him.
Judah took a wife for Er his firstborn,  her name was Tamar.
Er, Judah's firstborn, was wicked in the sight of Jehovah,  Jehovah killed him.
Judah said to Onan, Go in to thy brother's wife,  perform the duty of a husband's brother to her,  raise up seed to thy brother.
Onan knew that the seed would not be his. And it came to pass, when he went in to his brother's wife, that he spilled it on the ground, lest he should give seed to his brother.
the thing which he did was evil in the sight of Jehovah,  he killed him also.
Then Judah said to Tamar his daughter-in-law, Remain a widow in thy father's house, till Shelah my son be grown up, for he said, Lest he also die, like his brothers. And Tamar went and dwelt in her father's house.
in process of time Shua's daughter, the wife of Judah, died. And Judah was comforted,  went up to his sheep shearers to Timnah, he and his friend Hirah the Adullamite.
it was told Tamar, saying, Behold, thy father-in-law goes up to Timnah to shear his sheep.
she put the garments of her widowhood off from her,  covered herself with her veil,  wrapped herself,  sat in the gate of Enaim, which is by the way to Timnah, for she saw that Shelah was grown up,  she was not given to him to wife.
When Judah saw her, he thought her to be a harlot, for she had covered her face.
he turned to her by the way,  said, Come, I pray thee, let me come in to thee, for he did not know that she was his daughter-in-law. And she said, What will thou give me, that thou may come in to me?
he said, I will send thee a kid of the goats from the flock. And she said, Will thou give me a pledge, till thou send it?
he said, What pledge shall I give thee? And she said, Thy signet and thy cord,  thy staff that is in thy hand. And he gave them to her,  came in to her,  she conceived by him.
she arose,  went away,  put off her veil from her,  put on the garments of her widowhood.
Judah sent the kid of the goats by the hand of his friend the Adullamite, to receive the pledge from the woman's hand,  he did not find her.
Then he asked the men of her place, saying, Where is the prostitute, who was at Enaim by the wayside? And they said, There has been no prostitute here.
he returned to Judah,  said, I have not found her,  also the men of the place said, There has been no prostitute here.
Judah said, Let her take it to her, lest we be put to shame. Behold, I sent this kid,  thou have not found her.
it came to pass about three months after, that it was told Judah, saying, Tamar thy daughter-in-law has played the harlot,  moreover, behold, she is with child by whoredom. And Judah said, Bring her forth,  let her be burnt.
When she was brought forth, she sent to her father-in-law, saying, By the man, whose these are, I am with child. And she said, Discern, I pray thee, whose these are, the signet,  the cords,  the staff.
Judah acknowledged them,  said, She is more righteous than I, inasmuch as I did not give her to Shelah my son. And he knew her again no more.
it came to pass in the time of her travail, that, behold, twins were in her womb.
it came to pass, when she travailed, that one put out a hand. And the midwife took and bound upon his hand a scarlet thread, saying, This came out first.
it came to pass, as he drew back his hand, that, behold, his brother came out. And she said, Why have thou made a breach for thyself? Therefore his name was called Perez.
afterward his brother came out, who had the scarlet thread upon his hand. And his name was called Zerah.
Joseph was brought down to Egypt. And Potiphar, an officer of Pharaoh's, the captain of the guard, an Egyptian, bought him from the hand of the Ishmaelites, who had brought him down there.
Jehovah was with Joseph. And he was a man who succeeds. And he was in the house of his master the Egyptian.
his master saw that Jehovah was with him,  that Jehovah made all that he did to prosper in his hand.
Joseph found favor in his sight,  he ministered to him. And he made him overseer over his house,  all that he had he put into his hand.
it came to pass from the time that he made him overseer in his house,  over all that he had, that Jehovah blessed the Egyptian's house for Joseph's sake. And the blessing of Jehovah was upon all that he had, in the house and in the field.
he left all that he had in Joseph's hand,  he knew nothing that was with him, save the bread which he ate. And Joseph was comely,  well-favored.
it came to pass, after these things, that his master's wife cast her eyes upon Joseph,  she said, Lie with me.
But he refused,  said to his master's wife, Behold, my master does not know what is with me in the house,  he has put all that he has into my hand.
He is not greater in this house than I, nor has he kept back anything from me but thee, because thou are his wife. How then can I do this great wickedness,  sin against God?
it came to pass, as she spoke to Joseph day by day, that he did not hearken to her, to lie by her, or to be with her.
it came to pass, about this time, that he went into the house to do his work,  there was none of the men of the house there inside.
she caught him by his garment, saying, Lie with me. And he left his garment in her hand,  fled,  got out.
it came to pass, when she saw that he had left his garment in her hand,  was fled forth,
that she called to the men of her house,  spoke to them, saying, See, he has brought in a Hebrew to us to mock us. He came in to me to lie with me,  I cried with a loud voice.
it came to pass, when he heard that I lifted up my voice and cried, that he left his garment by me,  fled,  got out.
she laid up his garment by her until his master came home.
she spoke to him according to these words, saying, The Hebrew servant, whom thou have brought to us, came in to me to mock me.
it came to pass, as I lifted up my voice and cried, that he left his garment by me,  fled out.
it came to pass, when his master heard the words of his wife, which she spoke to him, saying, After this manner did thy servant to me, that his wrath was kindled.
Joseph's master took him,  put him into the prison, the place where the king's prisoners were bound. And he was there in the prison.
But Jehovah was with Joseph,  showed kindness to him,  gave him favor in the sight of the keeper of the prison.
the keeper of the prison committed to Joseph's hand all the prisoners who were in the prison. And whatever they did there, he was the doer of it.
The keeper of the prison did not look to anything that was under his hand, because Jehovah was with him,  that which he did, Jehovah made it prosper.
it came to pass after these things, that the butler of the king of Egypt,  his baker, offended their lord the king of Egypt.
Pharaoh was angry against his two officers, against the chief of the butlers,  against the chief of the bakers.
he put them in ward in the house of the captain of the guard, into the prison, the place where Joseph was bound.
the captain of the guard charged Joseph with them,  he ministered to them. And they continued a season in ward.
they dreamed a dream both of them, each man his dream, in one night, each man according to the interpretation of his dream, the butler and the baker of the king of Egypt, who were bound in the prison.
Joseph came in to them in the morning,  saw them, , behold, they were sad.
he asked Pharaoh's officers who were with him in ward in his master's house, saying, Why do ye look so sad today?
they said to him, We have dreamed a dream,  there is no man who can interpret it. And Joseph said to them, Do not interpretations belong to God? Tell it to me, I pray you.
the chief butler told his dream to Joseph,  said to him, In my dream, behold, a vine was before me.
in the vine were three branches. And it was as though it budded,  its blossoms shot forth,  the clusters of it brought forth ripe grapes.
Pharaoh's cup was in my hand,  I took the grapes,  pressed them into Pharaoh's cup,  I gave the cup into Pharaoh's hand.
Joseph said to him, This is the interpretation of it: The three branches are three days.
Within yet three days Pharaoh shall lift up thy head,  restore thee to thine office. And thou shall give Pharaoh's cup into his hand, after the former manner when thou was his butler.
But have me in thy remembrance when it shall be well with thee,  show kindness, I pray thee, to me,  make mention of me to Pharaoh,  bring me out of this house.
For indeed I was stolen away out of the land of the Hebrews,  here also I have done nothing that they should put me into the dungeon.
When the chief baker saw that the interpretation was good, he said to Joseph, I also was in my dream, , behold, three baskets of white bread were on my head.
in the uppermost basket there was of all manner of baked food for Pharaoh,  the birds ate them out of the basket upon my head.
Joseph answered and said, This is the interpretation of it: The three baskets are three days.
Within yet three days Pharaoh shall lift up thy head from off thee,  shall hang thee on a tree,  the birds shall eat thy flesh from off thee.
it came to pass the third day, which was Pharaoh's birthday, that he made a feast to all his servants. And he lifted up the head of the chief butler and the head of the chief baker among his servants.
he restored the chief butler to his butlership again,  he gave the cup into Pharaoh's hand,
but he hanged the chief baker, as Joseph had interpreted to them.
Yet the chief butler did not remember Joseph,  forgot him.
it came to pass at the end of two full years, that Pharaoh dreamed. And, behold, he stood by the river.
And, behold, there came up out of the river seven cows, well-favored and fat-fleshed,  they fed in the reed grass.
And, behold, seven other cows came up after them out of the river, ill-favored and lean-fleshed,  stood by the other cows upon the brink of the river.
the ill-favored and lean-fleshed cows ate up the seven well-favored and fat cows. So Pharaoh awoke.
he slept and dreamed a second time. And, behold, seven ears of grain came up upon one stalk, fat and good.
And, behold, seven ears, thin and blasted with the east wind, sprung up after them.
the thin ears swallowed up the seven fat and full ears. And Pharaoh awoke, , behold, it was a dream.
it came to pass in the morning, that his spirit was troubled,  he sent and called for all the magicians of Egypt,  all the wise men of it. And Pharaoh told them his dream,  there was no man who could interpret them to Pharaoh.
Then the chief butler spoke to Pharaoh, saying, I do remember my faults this day.
Pharaoh was angry with his servants,  put me in ward in the house of the captain of the guard, me and the chief baker.
we dreamed a dream in one night, I and he, we dreamed each man according to the interpretation of his dream.
there was a young man with us there, a Hebrew, servant to the captain of the guard,  we told him. And he interpreted to us our dreams. He interpreted to each man according to his dream.
it came to pass, as he interpreted to us, so it was; he restored me to my office,  he hanged him.
Then Pharaoh sent and called Joseph. And they brought him hastily out of the dungeon,  he shaved himself,  changed his raiment,  came in to Pharaoh.
Pharaoh said to Joseph, I have dreamed a dream,  there is no man who can interpret it. And I have heard say of thee, that when thou hear a dream thou can interpret it.
Joseph answered Pharaoh, saying, It is not in me. God will give Pharaoh an answer of peace.
Pharaoh spoke to Joseph, In my dream, behold, I stood upon the brink of the river.
And, behold, there came up out of the river seven cows, fat-fleshed and well-favored,  they fed in the reed grass.
And, behold, seven other cows came up after them, poor and very ill-favored and lean-fleshed, such as I never saw in all the land of Egypt for badness.
the lean and ill-favored cows ate up the first seven fat cows.
when they had eaten them up, it could not be known that they had eaten them,  they were still ill-favored, as at the beginning. So I awoke.
I saw in my dream, , behold, seven ears came up upon one stalk, full and good.
And, behold, seven ears, withered, thin,  blasted with the east wind, sprung up after them,
the thin ears swallowed up the seven good ears. And I told it to the magicians,  there was no man who could declare it to me.
Joseph said to Pharaoh, The dream of Pharaoh is one; what God is about to do he has declared to Pharaoh.
The seven good cows are seven years,  the seven good ears are seven years; the dream is one.
the seven lean and ill-favored cows that came up after them are seven years,  also the seven empty ears blasted with the east wind, they shall be seven years of famine.
That is the thing which I spoke to Pharaoh. What God is about to do he has shown to Pharaoh.
Behold, there come seven years of great plenty throughout all the land of Egypt,
there shall arise after them seven years of famine. And all the plenty shall be forgotten in the land of Egypt,  the famine shall consume the land.
the plenty shall not be known in the land because of that famine which follows, for it shall be very grievous.
because the dream was doubled to Pharaoh, it is because the thing is established by God,  God will shortly bring it to pass.
Now therefore let Pharaoh look out for a man discreet and wise,  set him over the land of Egypt.
Let Pharaoh do this,  let him appoint overseers over the land,  take up the fifth part of the land of Egypt in the seven plentiful years.
let them gather all the food of these good years that come,  lay up grain under the hand of Pharaoh for food in the cities,  let them keep it.
the food shall be for a store to the land against the seven years of famine, which shall be in the land of Egypt, that the land not perish through the famine.
the thing was good in the eyes of Pharaoh,  in the eyes of all his servants.
Pharaoh said to his servants, Can we find such a one as this, a man in whom is the spirit of God?
Pharaoh said to Joseph, Inasmuch as God has shown thee all of this, there is none so discreet and wise as thou.
Thou shall be over my house,  according to thy word all my people shall be ruled. Only in the throne I will be greater than thou.
Pharaoh said to Joseph, See, I have set thee over all the land of Egypt.
Pharaoh took his signet ring from off his hand,  put it upon Joseph's hand,  arrayed him in vestures of fine linen,  put a gold chain about his neck.
he made him to ride in the second chariot which he had,  they cried before him, Bow the knee. And he set him over all the land of Egypt.
Pharaoh said to Joseph, I am Pharaoh,  without thee no man shall lift up his hand or his foot in all the land of Egypt.
Pharaoh called Joseph's name Zaphenath-paneah,  he gave him Asenath, the daughter of Poti-phera priest of On, for a wife. And Joseph went out over the land of Egypt.
Joseph was thirty years old when he stood before Pharaoh king of Egypt. And Joseph went out from the presence of Pharaoh,  went throughout all the land of Egypt.
in the seven plenteous years the earth brought forth by handfuls.
he gathered up all the food of the seven years which were in the land of Egypt,  laid up the food in the cities. The food of the field, which was round about every city, he laid up in the same.
Joseph laid up grain as the sand of the sea, very much, until he left off numbering, for it was without number.
two sons were born to Joseph before the year of famine came, whom Asenath, the daughter of Potiphera priest of On, bore to him.
Joseph called the name of the firstborn Manasseh, for God has made me forget all my toil,  all my father's house.
the name of the second he called Ephraim, for God has made me fruitful in the land of my affliction.
the seven years of plenty, that was in the land of Egypt, came to an end.
the seven years of famine began to come, according as Joseph had said. And there was famine in all lands,  in all the land of Egypt there was bread.
when all the land of Egypt was famished, the people cried to Pharaoh for bread. And Pharaoh said to all the Egyptians, Go to Joseph; what he says to you, do.
the famine was over all the face of the earth. And Joseph opened all the storehouses,  sold to the Egyptians. And the famine was severe in the land of Egypt.
all countries came into Egypt to Joseph to buy grain, because the famine was severe on all the earth.
Now Jacob saw that there was grain in Egypt. And Jacob said to his sons, Why do ye look one upon another?
he said, Behold, I have heard that there is grain in Egypt. Get you down there,  buy for us from there, that we may live,  not die.
Joseph's ten brothers went down to buy grain from Egypt.
But Benjamin, Joseph's brother, Jacob did not send with his brothers, for he said, Lest perhaps harm befall him.
the sons of Israel came to buy among those who came, for the famine was in the land of Canaan.
Joseph was the governor over the land. It was he who sold to all the people of the land. And Joseph's brothers came,  bowed down themselves to him with their faces to the earth.
Joseph saw his brothers,  he knew them,  made himself foreign to them,  spoke roughly with them. And he said to them. From where come ye? And they said, From the land of Canaan to buy food.
Joseph knew his brothers,  they did not know him.
Joseph remembered the dreams which he dreamed of them. And said to them, Ye are spies; ye have come to see the nakedness of the land.
they said to him, No, my lord,  thy servants have come to buy food.
We are all one man's sons. We are true men. Thy servants are no spies.
he said to them, No,  ye have come to see the nakedness of the land.
they said, We thy servants are twelve brothers, the sons of one man in the land of Canaan. And, behold, the youngest is this day with our father,  one is not.
Joseph said to them, This is that which I spoke to you, saying, Ye are spies.
By this ye shall be proved: By the life of Pharaoh ye shall not go forth from here unless your youngest brother comes here.
Send one of you,  let him fetch your brother. And ye shall be bound, that your words may be proved, whether there be truth in you, or else by the life of Pharaoh surely ye are spies.
he put them all together into ward three days.
Joseph said to them the third day, This do,  live, for I fear God:
If ye be true men, let one of your brothers be bound in your prison house,  go ye, carry grain for the famine of your houses,
bring your youngest brother to me. So shall your words be verified,  ye shall not die. And they did so.
they said one to another, We are truly guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the distress of his soul when he besought us,  we would not hear. Therefore this distress has come upon us.
Reuben answered them, saying, Did I not speak to you, saying, Sin not against the child,  ye would not hear? Therefore also, behold, his blood is required.
they did not know that Joseph understood them, for there was an interpreter between them.
he turned himself around from them,  wept. And he returned to them,  spoke to them,  took Simeon from among them,  bound him before their eyes.
Then Joseph commanded to fill their vessels with grain,  to restore every man's money into his sack,  to give them provisions for the way. And thus it was done to them.
they loaded their donkeys with their grain,  departed from there.
as one of them opened his sack to give his donkey provender in the lodging place, he saw his money, , behold, it was in the mouth of his sack.
he said to his brothers, My money is restored, , lo, it is even in my sack. And their heart failed them,  they turned trembling one to another, saying, What is this that God has done to us?
they came to Jacob their father to the land of Canaan,  told him all that had befallen them, saying,
The man, the lord of the land, spoke roughly with us,  took us for spies of the country.
we said to him, We are true men,  we are no spies.
We are twelve brothers, sons of our father. One is not,  the youngest is this day with our father in the land of Canaan.
the man, the lord of the land, said to us, By this I shall know that ye are true men. Leave one of your brothers with me,  take grain for the famine of your houses,  go your way,
bring your youngest brother to me. Then I shall know that ye are no spies,  that ye are true men. So I will deliver your brother to you,  ye shall trade in the land.
it came to pass as they emptied their sacks, that, behold, every man's bundle of money was in his sack. And when they and their father saw their bundles of money, they were afraid.
Jacob their father said to them, Ye have bereaved me of my sons. Joseph is not,  Simeon is not,  ye will take Benjamin away. All these things are against me.
Reuben spoke to his father, saying, Kill my two sons if I do not bring him to thee. Deliver him into my hand,  I will bring him to thee again.
he said, My son shall not go down with you, for his brother is dead,  he only is left. If harm befalls him by the way in which ye go, then ye will bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to Sheol.
the famine was severe in the land.
it came to pass, when they had eaten up the grain which they had brought out of Egypt, their father said to them, Go again, buy us a little food.
Judah spoke to him, saying, The man solemnly protested to us, saying, Ye shall not see my face unless your brother be with you.
If thou will send our brother with us, we will go down and buy food for thee,
but if thou will not send him, we will not go down. For the man said to us, Ye shall not see my face unless your brother be with you.
Israel said, Why did ye deal so ill with me, as to tell the man whether ye had yet a brother?
they said, The man asked diligently concerning ourselves,  concerning our kindred, saying, Is your father yet alive? Have ye another brother? And we told him according to the tenor of these words. Could we in any way know that he would say, Bring your brother down?
Judah said to Israel his father, Send the young man with me,  we will arise and go, that we may live,  not die, both we,  thou,  also our little ones.
I will be surety for him, of my hand shall thou require him. If I do not bring him to thee,  set him before thee, then let me bear the blame forever.
For unless we had lingered, surely we would have now returned a second time.
their father Israel said to them, If it be so now, do this: Take of the choice fruits of the land in your vessels,  carry a present down to the man, a little balm,  a little honey, spicery and myrrh, nuts,  almonds.
take double money in your hand,  the money that was returned in the mouth of your sacks carry again in your hand. Perhaps it was an oversight.
Also take your brother,  arise, go again to the man.
God Almighty give you mercy before the man, that he may release to you your other brother and Benjamin. And if I be bereaved of my sons, I am bereaved.
the men took that present,  they took double money in their hand,  Benjamin,  rose up,  went down to Egypt,  stood before Joseph.
when Joseph saw Benjamin with them, he said to the steward of his house, Bring the men into the house,  kill,  make ready, for the men shall dine with me at noon.
the man did as Joseph bade,  the man brought the men to Joseph's house.
the men were afraid, because they were brought to Joseph's house,  they said, We are brought in because of the money that was returned in our sacks at the first time, that he may seek occasion against us,  fall upon us,  take us for bondmen,  our donkeys.
they came near to the steward of Joseph's house,  they spoke to him at the door of the house,
said, Oh, my lord, we indeed came down at the first time to buy food.
it came to pass, when we came to the lodging place, that we opened our sacks, , behold, every man's money was in the mouth of his sack, our money in full weight. And we have brought it again in our hand.
we have brought other money down in our hand to buy food. We know not who put our money in our sacks.
he said, Peace be to you, fear not. Your God,  the God of your father, has given you treasure in your sacks. I had your money. And he brought Simeon out to them.
the man brought the men into Joseph's house,  gave them water,  they washed their feet. And he gave their donkeys provender.
they made ready the present against Joseph's coming at noon, for they heard that they should eat bread there.
when Joseph came home, they brought him the present which was in their hand into the house,  bowed down themselves to him to the earth.
he asked them of their welfare,  said, Is your father well, the old man of whom ye spoke? Is he yet alive?
they said, Thy servant our father is well; he is yet alive. And they bowed the head,  made obeisance.
he lifted up his eyes,  saw Benjamin his brother, his mother's son,  said, Is this your youngest brother, of whom ye spoke to me? And he said, God be gracious to thee, my son.
Joseph made haste, for his heart yearned over his brother,  he sought where to weep. And he entered into his chamber,  wept there.
he washed his face,  came out. And he restrained himself,  said, Set on bread.
they set on for him by himself,  for them by themselves,  for the Egyptians, who ate with him, by themselves, because the Egyptians might not eat bread with the Hebrews, for that is an abomination to the Egyptians.
they sat before him, the firstborn according to his birthright,  the youngest according to his youth. And the men marveled one with another.
he took and sent portions to them from before him,  Benjamin's portion was five times so much as any of theirs. And they drank,  were merry with him.
he commanded the steward of his house, saying, Fill the men's sacks with food, as much as they can carry,  put every man's money in his sack's mouth.
put my cup, the silver cup, in the sack's mouth of the youngest,  his grain money. And he did according to the word that Joseph had spoken.
As soon as the morning was light, the men were sent away, they and their donkeys.
when they were gone out of the city,  were not yet far off, Joseph said to his steward, Up, follow after the men,  when thou overtake them, say to them, Why have ye rewarded evil for good?
Is not this that in which my lord drinks,  how he indeed divines? Ye have done evil in so doing.
he overtook them,  he spoke to them these words.
they said to him, Why does my lord speak such words as these? Far be it from thy servants that they should do such a thing.
Behold, the money, which we found in our sacks' mouths, we brought again to thee out of the land of Canaan. How then would we steal out of thy lord's house silver or gold?
With whomever of thy servants it be found, let him die,  we also will be my lord's bondmen.
he said, Now also let it be according to your words. He with whom it is found shall be my bondman,  ye shall be blameless.
Then they hurried,  took down every man his sack to the ground,  opened every man his sack.
he searched,  began at the eldest,  left off at the youngest. And the cup was found in Benjamin's sack.
Then they tore their clothes,  every man loaded his donkey,  returned to the city.
Judah and his brothers came to Joseph's house. And he was yet there,  they fell before him on the ground.
Joseph said to them, What deed is this that ye have done? Know ye not that such a man as I can indeed divine?
Judah said, What shall we say to my lord? What shall we speak, or how shall we clear ourselves? God has found out the iniquity of thy servants. Behold, we are my lord's bondmen, both we,  he also in whose hand the cup is found.
he said, Far be it from me that I should do so. The man in whose hand the cup is found, he shall be my bondman,  as for you, get you up in peace to your father.
Then Judah came near to him,  said, Oh, my lord, let thy servant, I pray thee, speak a word in my lord's ears,  let not thine anger burn against thy servant, for thou are even as Pharaoh.
My lord asked his servants, saying, Have ye a father, or a brother?
we said to my lord, We have a father, an old man,  a child of his old age, a little one. And his brother is dead,  he alone is left of his mother,  his father loves him.
thou said to thy servants, Bring him down to me, that I may set my eyes upon him.
we said to my lord, The young man cannot leave his father, for if he should leave his father, his father would die.
thou said to thy servants, Unless your youngest brother come down with you, ye shall see my face no more.
it came to pass when we came up to thy servant my father, we told him the words of my lord.
our father said, Go again, buy us a little food.
we said, We cannot go down. If our youngest brother be with us, then will we go down, for we may not see the man's face unless our youngest brother be with us.
thy servant my father said to us, Ye know that my wife bore me two sons.
the one went out from me,  I said, Surely he is torn in pieces,  I have not seen him since.
if ye take this one also from me,  harm befall him, ye will bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to Sheol.
Now therefore when I come to thy servant my father,  the young man is not with us, since his life is bound up in the young man's life,
it will come to pass, when he sees that the young man is not with us, that he will die. And thy servants will bring down the gray hairs of thy servant our father with sorrow to Sheol.
For thy servant became surety for the young man to my father, saying, If I do not bring him to thee, then I shall bear the blame to my father forever.
Now therefore, let thy servant, I pray thee, abide a bondman to my lord instead of the young man,  let the young man go up with his brothers.
For how shall I go up to my father, if the young man be not with me? Lest I see the evil that shall come on my father.
Then Joseph could not restrain himself before all those who stood before him,  he cried out, Cause every man to go out from me. And no man stood with him while Joseph made himself known to his brothers.
he wept aloud,  the Egyptians heard,  the house of Pharaoh heard.
Joseph said to his brothers, I am Joseph, does my father yet live? And his brothers could not answer him, for they were troubled at his presence.
Joseph said to his brothers, Come near to me, I pray you. And they came near,  he said, I am Joseph your brother, whom ye sold into Egypt.
now be not grieved, nor angry with yourselves, that ye sold me here, for God sent me before you to preserve life.
For the famine has been in the land these two years,  there are yet five years, in which there shall be neither plowing nor harvest.
God sent me before you to preserve for you a remnant on the earth,  to save you alive by a great deliverance.
So now it was not you that sent me here,  God,  he has made me a father to Pharaoh,  lord of all his house,  ruler over all the land of Egypt.
Hasten ye,  go up to my father,  say to him, Thus says thy son Joseph: God has made me lord of all Egypt. Come down to me, delay not.
thou shall dwell in the land of Goshen,  thou shall be near to me, thou,  thy sons,  thy sons' sons,  thy flocks,  thy herds,  all that thou have.
there will I nourish thee, for there are yet five years of famine, lest thou come to poverty, thou,  thy household,  all that thou have.
And, behold, your eyes see,  the eyes of my brother Benjamin, that it is my mouth that speaks to you.
ye shall tell my father of all my glory in Egypt,  of all that ye have seen. And ye shall hasten and bring down my father here.
he fell upon his brother Benjamin's neck,  wept,  Benjamin wept upon his neck.
he kissed all his brothers,  wept upon them. And after that his brothers talked with him.
the report of it was heard in Pharaoh's house, saying, Joseph's brothers have come. And it pleased Pharaoh well,  his servants.
Pharaoh said to Joseph, Say to thy brothers, This do ye: Load your beasts,  go, get you to the land of Canaan,
take your father and your households,  come to me. And I will give you the good of the land of Egypt,  ye shall eat the fat of the land.
Now thou are commanded, this do ye: Take wagons for you out of the land of Egypt for your little ones,  for your wives,  bring your father,  come.
Also do not regard your stuff, for the good of all the land of Egypt is yours.
the sons of Israel did so. And Joseph gave them wagons, according to the commandment of Pharaoh,  gave them provision for the way.
He gave to all of them, each man, changes of raiment,  to Benjamin he gave three hundred pieces of silver,  five changes of raiment.
he sent to his father according to this manner: ten donkeys laden with the good things of Egypt,  ten she-donkeys laden with grain and bread and provision for his father by the way.
So he sent his brothers away,  they departed. And he said to them, See that ye not fall out by the way.
they went up out of Egypt,  came into the land of Canaan to Jacob their father.
they told him, saying, Joseph is yet alive,  he is ruler over all the land of Egypt. And his heart fainted, for he did not believe them.
they told him all the words of Joseph, which he had said to them. And when he saw the wagons which Joseph had sent to carry him, the spirit of Jacob their father revived.
Israel said, It is enough, Joseph my son is yet alive. I will go and see him before I die.
Israel took his journey with all that he had,  came to Beersheba,  offered sacrifices to the God of his father Isaac.
God spoke to Israel in the visions of the night,  said, Jacob, Jacob. And he said, Here I am.
he said, I am God, the God of thy father. Fear not to go down into Egypt, for I will there make of thee a great nation.
I will go down with thee into Egypt,  I will also surely bring thee up again,  Joseph shall put his hand upon thine eyes.
Jacob rose up from Beersheba,  the sons of Israel carried Jacob their father,  their little ones,  their wives, in the wagons which Pharaoh had sent to carry him.
they took up their goods,  all their property, which they had gotten in the land of Canaan, they came into the land of Egypt, Jacob,  all his seed with him:
the sons,  the sons of his sons with him, his daughters,  the daughters of his daughters. And he brought all his seed into Egypt.
these are the names of the sons of Israel, who came into Egypt, Jacob and his sons: Reuben, Jacob's firstborn.
the sons of Reuben: Hanoch,  Pallu,  Hezron,  Carmi.
the sons of Simeon: Jemuel,  Jamin,  Ohad,  Jachin,  Zohar,  Shaul the son of a Canaanite woman.
the sons of Levi: Gershon, Kohath,  Merari.
the sons of Judah: Er,  Onan,  Shelah,  Perez,  Zerah. But Er and Onan died in the land of Canaan. And the sons of Perez were Hezron and Hamul.
the sons of Issachar: Tola,  Puvah,  Iob,  Shimron.
the sons of Zebulun: Sered,  Elon,  Jahleel.
These are the sons of Leah, whom she bore to Jacob in Paddan-aram, with his daughter Dinah. All the souls of his sons and his daughters were thirty-three.
the sons of Gad: Ziphion,  Haggi, Shuni,  Ezbon, Eri,  Arodi,  Areli.
the sons of Asher: Imnah,  Ishvah,  Ishvi,  Beriah,  Serah their sister. And the sons of Beriah: Heber,  Malchiel.
These are the sons of Zilpah, whom Laban gave to Leah his daughter; and these she bore to Jacob, even sixteen souls.
The sons of Rachel Jacob's wife: Joseph and Benjamin.
to Joseph in the land of Egypt were born Manasseh and Ephraim, whom Asenath, the daughter of Poti-phera priest of On, bore to him.
the sons of Benjamin: Bela,  Becher,  Ashbel, Gera,  Naaman, Ehi,  Rosh, Muppim,  Huppim,  Ard.
These are the sons of Rachel, who were born to Jacob: all the souls were fourteen.
the sons of Dan: Hushim.
the sons of Naphtali: Jahzeel,  Guni,  Jezer,  Shillem.
These are the sons of Bilhah, whom Laban gave to Rachel his daughter,  these she bore to Jacob. All the souls were seven.
All the souls that came with Jacob into Egypt, that came out of his loins, besides Jacob's sons' wives, all the souls were sixty-six.
the sons of Joseph, who were born to him in Egypt, were two souls. All the souls of the house of Jacob, that came into Egypt, were seventy.
he sent Judah before him to Joseph, to show the way before him to Goshen,  they came into the land of Goshen.
Joseph made his chariot ready,  went up to meet Israel his father, to Goshen. And he presented himself to him,  fell on his neck,  wept on his neck a good while.
Israel said to Joseph, Now let me die, since I have seen thy face, that thou are yet alive.
Joseph said to his brothers,  to his father's house, I will go up,  tell Pharaoh,  will say to him, My brothers,  my father's house, who were in the land of Canaan, have come to me.
the men are shepherds, for they have been keepers of cattle,  they have brought their flocks,  their herds,  all that they have.
it shall come to pass, when Pharaoh shall call you,  shall say, What is your occupation?
that ye shall say, Thy servants have been keepers of cattle from our youth even until now, both we,  our fathers, that ye may dwell in the land of Goshen, for every shepherd is an abomination to the Egyptians.
Then Joseph went in and told Pharaoh,  said, My father and my brothers,  their flocks,  their herds,  all that they have, have come out of the land of Canaan. And, behold, they are in the land of Goshen.
he took five men from among his brothers,  presented them to Pharaoh.
Pharaoh said to his brothers, What is your occupation? And they said to Pharaoh, Thy servants are shepherds, both we,  our fathers.
they said to Pharaoh, We have come to sojourn in the land, for there is no pasture for thy servants' flocks, for the famine is severe in the land of Canaan. Now therefore, we pray thee, let thy servants dwell in the land of Goshen.
Pharaoh spoke to Joseph, saying, Thy father and thy brothers have come to thee.
The land of Egypt is before thee. Make thy father and thy brothers to dwell in the best of the land; in the land of Goshen let them dwell. And if thou know any able men among them, then make them rulers over my cattle.
Joseph brought in Jacob his father,  set him before Pharaoh,  Jacob blessed Pharaoh.
Pharaoh said to Jacob, How many are the days of the years of thy life?
Jacob said to Pharaoh, The days of the years of my pilgrimage are a hundred and thirty years. Few and evil have been the days of the years of my life,  they have not attained to the days of the years of the life of my fathers in the days of their pilgrimage.
Jacob blessed Pharaoh,  went out from the presence of Pharaoh.
Joseph placed his father and his brothers,  gave them a possession in the land of Egypt, in the best of the land, in the land of Rameses, as Pharaoh had commanded.
Joseph nourished his father,  his brothers,  all his father's household, with bread, according to their families.
there was no bread in all the land, for the famine was very severe, so that the land of Egypt and the land of Canaan fainted by reason of the famine.
Joseph gathered up all the money that was found in the land of Egypt,  in the land of Canaan, for the grain which they bought. And Joseph brought the money into Pharaoh's house.
when the money was all spent in the land of Egypt,  in the land of Canaan, all the Egyptians came to Joseph,  said, Give us bread, for why should we die in thy presence? For our money fails.
Joseph said, Give your cattle,  I will give you for your cattle, if money fails.
they brought their cattle to Joseph. And Joseph gave them bread in exchange for the horses,  for the flocks,  for the herds,  for the donkeys. And he fed them with bread in exchange for all their cattle for that year.
when that year was ended, they came to him the second year,  said to him, We will not hide from my lord, how that our money is all spent,  the herds of cattle are my lord's; there is nothing left in the sight of my lord,  our bodies,  our lands.
Why should we die before thine eyes, both we and our land? Buy us and our land for bread,  we and our land will be servants to Pharaoh. And give us seed, that we may live,  not die,  that the land not be desolate.
So Joseph bought all the land of Egypt for Pharaoh. For the Egyptians, every man, sold his field, because the famine was severe upon them. And the land became Pharaoh's.
as for the people, he moved them to the cities from one end of the border of Egypt even to the other end of it.
Only he did not buy the land of the priests, for the priests had a portion from Pharaoh,  ate their portion which Pharaoh gave them. Therefore they did not sell their land.
Then Joseph said to the people, Behold, I have bought you this day and your land for Pharaoh. Lo, here is seed for you,  ye shall sow the land.
it shall come to pass at the ingatherings, that ye shall give a fifth to Pharaoh,  four parts shall be your own, for seed of the field,  for your food,  for those of your households,  for food for your little ones.
they said, Thou have saved our lives. Let us find favor in the sight of my lord,  we will be Pharaoh's servants.
Joseph made it a statute concerning the land of Egypt to this day, that Pharaoh should have the fifth. Only the land of the priests alone did not become Pharaoh's.
Israel dwelt in the land of Egypt, in the land of Goshen. And they got possessions in it,  were fruitful,  multiplied exceedingly.
Jacob lived in the land of Egypt seventeen years. So the days of Jacob, the years of his life, were a hundred forty-seven years.
the time drew near that Israel must die. And he called his son Joseph,  said to him, If now I have found favor in thy sight, put thy hand, I pray thee, under my thigh,  deal kindly and truly with me. Bury me not, I pray thee, in Egypt,
but when I sleep with my fathers, thou shall carry me out of Egypt,  bury me in their burying place. And he said, I will do as thou have said.
he said, Swear to me,  he swore to him. And Israel bowed himself upon the head of the bed.
it came to pass after these things, that it was reported to Joseph, Behold, thy father is sick. And he took with him his two sons, Manasseh and Ephraim.
it was reported to Jacob, saying, Behold, thy son Joseph comes to thee. And Israel strengthened himself,  sat upon the bed.
Jacob said to Joseph, God Almighty appeared to me at Luz in the land of Canaan,  blessed me,
said to me, Behold, I will make thee fruitful,  multiply thee,  I will make of thee a company of peoples,  will give this land to thy seed after thee for an everlasting possession.
now thy two sons, who were born to thee in the land of Egypt before I came to thee into Egypt, are mine, Ephraim and Manasseh, even as Reuben and Simeon, shall be mine.
thy issue, which thou beget after them, shall be thine, they shall be called after the name of their brothers in their inheritance.
as for me, when I came from Paddan, Rachel died by me in the land of Canaan on the way, when there was still some distance to come to Ephrath. And I buried her there on the way to Ephrath (the same is Bethlehem).
Israel beheld Joseph's sons,  said, Who are these?
Joseph said to his father, They are my sons, whom God has given me here. And he said, Bring them, I pray thee, to me,  I will bless them.
Now the eyes of Israel were dim for age, so that he could not see. And he brought them near to him,  he kissed them,  embraced them.
Israel said to Joseph, I had not thought to see thy face, , lo, God has let me see thy seed also.
Joseph brought them out from between his knees,  he bowed himself with his face to the earth.
Joseph took them both, Ephraim in his right hand toward Israel's left hand,  Manasseh in his left hand toward Israel's right hand,  brought them near to him.
Israel stretched out his right hand,  laid it upon Ephraim's head, who was the younger,  his left hand upon Manasseh's head, guiding his hands deliberately, for Manasseh was the firstborn.
he blessed Joseph,  said, The God before whom my fathers Abraham and Isaac walked, the God who has fed me all my life long to this day,
the agent who has redeemed me from all evil, bless the lads,  let my name be named on them,  the name of my fathers Abraham and Isaac,  let them grow into a multitude in the midst of the earth.
when Joseph saw that his father laid his right hand upon the head of Ephraim, it displeased him. And he held up his father's hand, to remove it from Ephraim's head to Manasseh's head.
Joseph said to his father, Not so, my father, for this is the firstborn, put thy right hand upon his head.
his father refused,  said, I know, my son, I know. He also shall become a people,  he also shall be great. However, his younger brother shall be greater than he,  his seed shall become a multitude of nations.
he blessed them that day, saying, In thee will Israel bless, saying, God make thee as Ephraim and as Manasseh. And he set Ephraim before Manasseh.
Israel said to Joseph, Behold, I die,  God will be with you,  bring you again to the land of your fathers.
Moreover I have given to thee one portion above thy brothers, which I took out of the hand of the Amorite with my sword and with my bow.
Jacob called to his sons,  said, gather yourselves together, that I may tell you that which shall befall you in the latter days.
Assemble yourselves,  hear, ye sons of Jacob,  hearken to Israel your father.
Reuben, thou are my firstborn, my might,  the beginning of my strength, the pre-eminence of dignity,  the pre-eminence of power.
Boiling over as water, thou shall not have the pre-eminence, because thou went up to thy father's bed, then thou defiled it; he went up to my couch.
Simeon and Levi are brothers, weapons of violence are their swords.
O my soul, come not thou into their council, to their assembly, my glory, be not thou united, for in their anger they slew a man,  in their self-will they hocked an ox.
Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce,  their wrath, for it was cruel. I will divide them in Jacob,  scatter them in Israel.
Judah, thy brothers shall praise thee. Thy hand shall be on the neck of thine enemies. Thy father's sons shall bow down before thee.
Judah is a lion's whelp. From the prey, my son, thou have gone up. He stooped down, he couched as a lion,  as a lioness, who shall rouse him up?
The scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor the ruler's staff from between his feet, until he comes to whom it belongs,  to him shall the obedience of the peoples be.
Binding his foal to the vine,  his donkey's colt to the choice vine, he has washed his garments in wine,  his vesture in the blood of grapes.
His eyes shall be red with wine,  his teeth white with milk.
Zebulun shall dwell at the haven of the sea,  he shall be for a haven of ships. And his border shall be upon Sidon.
Issachar is a strong donkey, couching down between the sheepfolds.
he saw a resting place that it was good,  the land that it was pleasant. And he bowed his shoulder to bear,  became a servant under task work.
Dan shall judge his people, as one of the tribes of Israel.
Dan shall be a serpent in the way, an adder in the path, that bites the horse's heels, so that his rider falls backward.
I have waited for thy salvation, O Jehovah.
Gad, a troop shall press upon him,  he shall press upon their heel.
Out of the Asher his bread shall be fat,  he shall yield royal dainties.
Naphtali is a hind let loose. He gives goodly words.
Joseph is a fruitful bough, a fruitful bough by a fountain, his branches run over the wall.
The archers have sorely grieved him,  shot at him,  persecute him,
but his bow abode in strength. And the arms of his hands were made strong by the hands of the Mighty One of Jacob (From there is the shepherd, the stone of Israel),
even by the God of thy father, who shall help thee,  by the Almighty, who shall bless thee with blessings of heaven above, blessings of the deep that couches beneath, blessings of the breasts,  of the womb.
The blessings of thy father have prevailed above the blessings of my forefathers to the utmost bound of the everlasting hills. They shall be on the head of Joseph,  on the crown of the head of him who was separate from his brothers.
Benjamin is a wolf that ravens. In the morning he shall devour the prey,  at evening he shall divide the spoil.
All these are the twelve tribes of Israel,  this is it that their father spoke to them and blessed them; every man according to his blessing he blessed them.
he ordered them,  said to them, I am to be gathered to my people. Bury me with my fathers in the cave that is in the field of Ephron the Hittite,
in the cave that is in the field of Machpelah, which is before Mamre, in the land of Canaan, which Abraham bought with the field from Ephron the Hittite for a possession of a burying place.
There they buried Abraham and Sarah his wife, there they buried Isaac and Rebekah his wife,  there I buried Leah,
the field and the cave that is in it, which was purchased from the sons of Heth.
when Jacob made an end of charging his sons, he gathered up his feet into the bed,  yielded up the spirit,  was gathered to his people.
Joseph fell upon his father's face,  wept upon him,  kissed him.
Joseph commanded his servants the physicians to embalm his father. And the physicians embalmed Israel.
forty days were fulfilled for him, for so are fulfilled the days of embalming. And the Egyptians wept for him seventy days.
when the days of weeping for him were past, Joseph spoke to the house of Pharaoh, saying, If now I have found favor in your eyes, speak, I pray you, in the ears of Pharaoh, saying,
My father made me swear, saying, Lo, I die. In my grave which I have dug for me in the land of Canaan, there shall thou bury me. Now therefore let me go up, I pray thee,  bury my father,  I will come again.
Pharaoh said, Go up,  bury thy father, according as he made thee swear.
Joseph went up to bury his father,  with him went up all the servants of Pharaoh, the elders of his house,  all the elders of the land of Egypt,
all the house of Joseph,  his brothers,  his father's house. Only their little ones,  their flocks,  their herds, they left in the land of Goshen.
there went up with him both chariots and horsemen. And it was a very great company.
they came to the threshing floor of Atad, which is beyond the Jordan. And there they lamented with a very great and sore lamentation. And he made a mourning for his father seven days.
when the inhabitants of the land, the Canaanites, saw the mourning in the floor of Atad, they said, This is a grievous mourning to the Egyptians. Therefore the name of it was called Abel-mizraim, which is beyond the Jordan.
his sons did to him according as he commanded them.
For his sons carried him into the land of Canaan,  buried him in the cave of the field of Machpelah, which Abraham bought with the field, for a possession of a burying place, of Ephron the Hittite, before Mamre.
Joseph returned into Egypt, he,  his brothers,  all who went up with him to bury his father, after he had buried his father.
when Joseph's brothers saw that their father was dead, they said, It may be that Joseph will hate us,  will fully requite us all the evil which we did to him.
they sent a message to Joseph, saying, Thy father commanded before he died, saying,
So shall ye say to Joseph, Forgive, I pray thee now, the transgression of thy brothers,  their sin, because they did to thee evil. And now, we pray thee, forgive the transgression of the servants of the God of thy father. And Joseph wept when they spoke to him.
his brothers also went and fell down before his face,  they said, Behold, we are thy servants.
Joseph said to them, Fear not, for am I in the place of God?
as for you, ye meant evil against me,  God meant it for good, to bring to pass, as it is this day, to save much people alive.
Now therefore fear ye not. I will nourish you,  your little ones. And he comforted them,  spoke kindly to them.
Joseph dwelt in Egypt, he,  his father's house. And Joseph lived a hundred and ten years.
Joseph saw Ephraim's sons of the third generation. Also the sons of Machir the son of Manasseh were born upon Joseph's knees.
Joseph said to his brothers, I die,  God will surely visit you,  bring you up out of this land to the land which he swore to Abraham, to Isaac,  to Jacob.
Joseph took an oath of the sons of Israel, saying, God will surely visit you,  ye shall carry up my bones from here.
So Joseph died, being a hundred and ten years old,  they embalmed him,  he was put in a coffin in Egypt.
Exodus
Exod. Now these are the names of the sons of Israel who came into Egypt (every man and his household who came with Jacob):
Exod. Reuben, Simeon, Levi,  Judah,
Exod. Issachar, Zebulun,  Benjamin,
Exod. Dan and Naphtali, Gad and Asher.
Exod. And all the souls who came out of the loins of Jacob were seventy souls. And Joseph was in Egypt already.
Exod. And Joseph died,  all his brothers,  all that generation.
Exod. And the sons of Israel were fruitful,  increased abundantly,  multiplied,  grew exceedingly mighty,  the land was filled with them.
Exod. Now there arose a new king over Egypt, who knew not Joseph.
Exod. And he said to his people, Behold, the people of the sons of Israel are more and mightier than we.
Exod. Come, let us deal craftily with them, lest they multiply,  it come to pass, that, when war happens, they also join themselves to our enemies,  fight against us,  get them up out of the land.
Exod. Therefore they set taskmasters over them to afflict them with their burdens. And they built store-cities for Pharaoh, Pithom and Rameses.
Exod. But the more they afflicted them, the more they multiplied and the more they spread out. And they were grieved because of the sons of Israel.
Exod. And the Egyptians made the sons of Israel to serve with rigor.
Exod. And they made their lives bitter with hard service, in mortar and in brick,  in all manner of service in the field, all their service, with which they made them serve with rigor.
Exod. And the king of Egypt spoke to the Hebrew midwives, of whom the name of the one was Shiphrah,  the name of the other Puah.
Exod. And he said, When ye do the office of a midwife to the Hebrew women,  see them upon the birth-stool, if it be a son, then ye shall kill him,  if it be a daughter, then she shall live.
Exod. But the midwives feared God,  did not do as the king of Egypt commanded them,  saved the male children alive.
Exod. And the king of Egypt called for the midwives,  said to them, Why have ye done this thing,  have saved the male children alive?
Exod. And the midwives said to Pharaoh, Because the Hebrew women are not as the Egyptian women, for they are lively,  are delivered before the midwife comes to them.
Exod. And God dealt well with the midwives. And the people multiplied,  grew very mighty.
Exod. And it came to pass, because the midwives feared God, that he made them households.
Exod. And Pharaoh ordered all his people, saying, Every son that is born ye shall cast into the river,  every daughter ye shall save alive.
Exod. And there went a man of the house of Levi,  took to wife a daughter of Levi.
Exod. And the woman conceived,  bore a son. And when she saw him that he was a goodly child, she hid him three months.
Exod. And when she could no longer hide him, she took for him an ark of bulrushes,  daubed it with slime and with pitch. And she put the child in it,  laid it in the reeds by the river's edge.
Exod. And his sister stood afar off, to know what would be done to him.
Exod. And the daughter of Pharaoh came down to bathe at the river,  her maidens walked along by the riverside. And she saw the ark among the reeds,  sent her handmaid to fetch it.
Exod. And she opened it,  saw the child, , behold, the babe wept. And she had compassion on him,  said, This is one of the Hebrews' children.
Exod. Then his sister said to Pharaoh's daughter, Shall I go and call a nurse for thee from the Hebrew women, that she may nurse the child for thee?
Exod. And Pharaoh's daughter said to her, Go. And the maiden went and called the child's mother.
Exod. And Pharaoh's daughter said to her, Take this child away,  nurse it for me,  I will give thee thy wages. And the woman took the child,  nursed it.
Exod. And the child grew,  she brought him to Pharaoh's daughter,  he became her son. And she called his name Moses,  said, Because I drew him out of the water.
Exod. And it came to pass in those days, when Moses was grown up, that he went out to his brothers,  looked on their burdens. And he saw an Egyptian smiting a Hebrew, one of his brothers.
Exod. And he looked this way and that way,  when he saw that there was no man, he smote the Egyptian,  hid him in the sand.
Exod. And he went out the second day, , behold, two men of the Hebrews were striving together. And he said to him who did the wrong, Why do thou smite thy neighbor?
Exod. And he said, Who made thee a prince and a judge over us? Do thou think to kill me, as thou killed the Egyptian? And Moses feared,  said, Surely the thing is known.
Exod. Now when Pharaoh heard this thing, he sought to kill Moses. But Moses fled from the face of Pharaoh,  dwelt in the land of Midian,  he sat down by a well.
Exod. Now the priest of Midian had seven daughters. And they came and drew water,  filled the troughs to water their father's flock.
Exod. And the shepherds came and drove them away,  Moses stood up and helped them,  watered their flock.
Exod. And when they came to Reuel their father, he said, How is it that ye have come so soon today?
Exod. And they said, An Egyptian delivered us out of the hand of the shepherds,  moreover he drew water for us,  watered the flock.
Exod. And he said to his daughters, And where is he? Why is it that ye have left the man? Call him, that he may eat bread.
Exod. And Moses was content to dwell with the man,  he gave Moses Zipporah his daughter.
Exod. And she bore a son,  he called his name Gershom, for he said, I have been a sojourner in a foreign land.
Exod. And it came to pass in the course of those many days, that the king of Egypt died. And the sons of Israel sighed because of the bondage,  they cried,  their cry came up to God because of the bondage.
Exod. And God heard their groaning,  God remembered his covenant with Abraham, with Isaac,  with Jacob.
Exod. And God saw the sons of Israel,  God took knowledge of them.
Exod. Now Moses was keeping the flock of Jethro his father-in-law, the priest of Midian. And he led the flock to the back of the wilderness,  came to the mountain of God, to Horeb.
Exod. And the agent of Jehovah appeared to him in a flame of fire out of the midst of a bush. And he looked, , behold, the bush burned with fire,  the bush was not consumed.
Exod. And Moses said, I will turn aside now,  see this great sight, why the bush is not burnt.
Exod. And when Jehovah saw that he turned aside to see, God called to him out of the midst of the bush,  said, Moses, Moses. And he said, Here I am.
Exod. And he said, Do not draw near here. Put off thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place on which thou stand is holy ground.
Exod. Moreover he said, I am the God of thy father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac,  the God of Jacob. And Moses hid his face, for he was afraid to look upon God.
Exod. And Jehovah said, I have surely seen the affliction of my people who are in Egypt,  have heard their cry because of their taskmasters, for I know their sorrows.
Exod. And I have come down to deliver them out of the hand of the Egyptians,  to bring them up out of that land to a good and large land, to a land flowing with milk and honey, to the place of the Canaanite,  the Hittite,  the Amorite,  the Perizzite,  the Hivite,  the Jebusite.
Exod. And now, behold, the cry of the sons of Israel has come to me. Moreover I have seen the oppression with which the Egyptians oppress them.
Exod. Come now therefore,  I will send thee to Pharaoh, that thou may bring forth my people the sons of Israel out of Egypt.
Exod. And Moses said to God, Who am I, that I should go to Pharaoh,  that I should bring forth the sons of Israel out of Egypt?
Exod. And he said, I will certainly be with thee. And this shall be the sign to thee, that I have sent thee: When thou have brought forth the people out of Egypt, ye shall serve God upon this mountain.
Exod. And Moses said to God, Behold, when I come to the sons of Israel,  shall say to them, The God of your fathers has sent me to you,  they shall say to me, What is his name? What shall I say to them?
Exod. And God said to Moses, I AM WHO I AM. And he said, Thus shall thou say to the sons of Israel, I AM has sent me to you.
Exod. And God said moreover to Moses, Thus shall thou say to the sons of Israel, Jehovah, the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac,  the God of Jacob, has sent me to you. This is my name forever,  this is my memorial to all generations.
Exod. Go,  gather the elders of Israel together,  say to them, Jehovah, the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, of Isaac,  of Jacob, has appeared to me, saying, I have surely visited you,  seen that which is done to you in Egypt.
Exod. And I have said, I will bring you up out of the affliction of Egypt to the land of the Canaanite,  the Hittite,  the Amorite,  the Perizzite,  the Hivite,  the Jebusite, to a land flowing with milk and honey.
Exod. And they shall hearken to thy voice. And thou shall come, thou and the elders of Israel, to the king of Egypt,  ye shall say to him, Jehovah, the God of the Hebrews, has met with us. And now let us go, we pray thee, three days' journey into the wilderness, that we may sacrifice to Jehovah our God.
Exod. And I know that the king of Egypt will not give you leave to go, no, not by a mighty hand.
Exod. And I will put forth my hand,  smite Egypt with all my wonders which I will do in the midst of it,  after that he will let you go.
Exod. And I will give this people favor in the sight of the Egyptians. And it shall come to pass, that, when ye go, ye shall not go empty.
Exod. But every woman shall ask of her neighbor,  of her who sojourns in her house, jewels of silver,  jewels of gold,  raiment. And ye shall put them upon your sons,  upon your daughters,  ye shall despoil the Egyptians.
Exod. And Moses answered and said, But behold, they will not believe me, nor hearken to my voice, for they will say, Jehovah has not appeared to thee.
Exod. And Jehovah said to him, What is that in thy hand? And he said, A rod.
Exod. And he said, Cast in on the ground. And he cast it on the ground. And it became a serpent,  Moses fled from before it.
Exod. And Jehovah said to Moses, Put forth thy hand,  take it by the tail (and he put forth his hand,  laid hold of it,  it became a rod in his hand),
Exod. that they may believe that Jehovah, the God of their fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac,  the God of Jacob, has appeared to thee.
Exod. And Jehovah said furthermore to him, Put now thy hand into thy bosom. And he put his hand into his bosom. And when he took it out, behold, his hand was leprous, as snow.
Exod. And he said, Put thy hand into thy bosom again. (And he put his hand into his bosom again,  when he took it out of his bosom, behold, it was turned again as his other flesh.)
Exod. And it shall come to pass, if they will not believe thee, nor hearken to the voice of the first sign, that they will believe the voice of the latter sign.
Exod. And it shall come to pass, if they will not believe even these two signs, nor hearken to thy voice, that thou shall take of the water of the river,  pour it upon the dry land. And the water which thou take out of the river shall become blood upon the dry land.
Exod. And Moses said to Jehovah, Oh, Lord, I am not eloquent, neither heretofore, nor since thou have spoken to thy servant, for I am slow of speech,  of a slow tongue.
Exod. And Jehovah said to him, Who has made man's mouth? Or who makes a man dumb, or deaf, or seeing, or blind? Is it not I, Jehovah?
Exod. Now therefore go,  I will be with thy mouth,  teach thee what thou shall speak.
Exod. And he said, Oh, Lord, send, I pray thee, by the hand of him whom thou will send.
Exod. And the anger of Jehovah was kindled against Moses,  he said, Is there not Aaron thy brother the Levite? I know that he can speak well. And also, behold, he comes forth to meet thee,  when he sees thee, he will be glad in his heart.
Exod. And thou shall speak to him,  put the words in his mouth. And I will be with thy mouth,  with his mouth,  will teach you what ye shall do,
Exod. and he shall be thy spokesman to the people. And it shall come to pass, that he shall be to thee a mouth,  thou shall be to him as God.
Exod. And thou shall take this rod in thy hand, with which thou shall do the signs.
Exod. And Moses went and returned to Jethro his father-in-law,  said to him, Let me go, I pray thee,  return to my brothers who are in Egypt,  see whether they be yet alive. And Jethro said to Moses, Go in peace.
Exod. And Jehovah said to Moses in Midian, Go, return into Egypt, for all the men are dead who sought thy life.
Exod. And Moses took his wife and his sons,  set them upon a donkey,  he returned to the land of Egypt. And Moses took the rod of God in his hand.
Exod. And Jehovah said to Moses, When thou go back into Egypt, see that thou do before Pharaoh all the wonders which I have put in thy hand,  I will harden his heart and he will not let the people go.
Exod. And thou shall say to Pharaoh, Thus says Jehovah, Israel is my son, my firstborn,
Exod. and I have said to thee, Let my son go, that he may serve me,  thou have refused to let him go. Behold, I will slay thy son, thy firstborn.
Exod. And it came to pass on the way at the lodging-place, that Jehovah met him,  sought to kill him.
Exod. Then Zipporah took a flint,  cut off the foreskin of her son,  cast it at his feet. And she said, Surely a bridegroom of blood thou are to me.
Exod. So he let him alone. Then she said, A bridegroom of blood thou are, because of the circumcision.
Exod. And Jehovah said to Aaron, Go into the wilderness to meet Moses. And he went,  met him on the mountain of God,  kissed him.
Exod. And Moses told Aaron all the words of Jehovah with which he had sent him,  all the signs with which he had ordered him.
Exod. And Moses and Aaron went and gathered together all the elders of the sons of Israel.
Exod. And Aaron spoke all the words which Jehovah had spoken to Moses,  did the signs in the sight of the people.
Exod. And the people believed. And when they heard that Jehovah had visited the sons of Israel,  that he had seen their affliction, then they bowed their heads and worshiped.
Exod. And afterward Moses and Aaron came,  said to Pharaoh, Thus says Jehovah, the God of Israel, Let my people go, that they may hold a feast to me in the wilderness.
Exod. And Pharaoh said, Who is Jehovah, that I should hearken to his voice to let Israel go? I do not know Jehovah,  moreover I will not let Israel go.
Exod. And they said, The God of the Hebrews has met with us. Let us go, we pray thee, three days' journey into the wilderness,  sacrifice to Jehovah our God, lest he fall upon us with pestilence, or with the sword.
Exod. And the king of Egypt said to them, Therefore do ye, Moses and Aaron, loose the people from their works? Get you to your burdens.
Exod. And Pharaoh said, Behold, the people of the land are now many,  ye make them rest from their burdens.
Exod. And the same day Pharaoh commanded the taskmasters of the people,  their officers, saying,
Exod. Ye shall no more give the people straw to make brick as formerly. Let them go and gather straw for themselves.
Exod. And the number of the bricks, which they made formerly, ye shall lay upon them. Ye shall not diminish any of it. For they are idle, therefore they cry, saying, Let us go and sacrifice to our God.
Exod. Let heavier work be laid upon the men, that they may labor in it,  let them not regard lying words.
Exod. And the taskmasters of the people went out,  their officers,  they spoke to the people, saying, Thus says Pharaoh, I will not give you straw.
Exod. Go yourselves, get you straw where ye can find it, for none of your work shall be diminished.
Exod. So the people were scattered abroad throughout all the land of Egypt to gather stubble for straw.
Exod. And the taskmasters were urgent saying, Fulfill your works, your daily tasks, as when there was straw.
Exod. And the officers of the sons of Israel, whom Pharaoh's taskmasters had set over them, were beaten,  demanded, Why have ye not fulfilled your task both yesterday and today, in making brick as formerly?
Exod. Then the officers of the sons of Israel came and cried to Pharaoh, saying, Why do thou deal thus with thy servants?
Exod. There is no straw given to thy servants,  they say to us, Make brick. And, behold, thy servants are beaten,  the fault it in thine own people.
Exod. But he said, Ye are idle, ye are idle. Therefore ye say, Let us go and sacrifice to Jehovah.
Exod. Go therefore now,  work, for there shall no straw be given you, yet ye shall deliver the number of bricks.
Exod. And the officers of the sons of Israel saw that they were in affliction, when it was said, Ye shall not diminish anything from your bricks, your daily tasks.
Exod. And they met Moses and Aaron, who stood in the way, as they came forth from Pharaoh,
Exod. and they said to them, Jehovah look upon you,  judge, because ye have made our fragrance to be abhorred in the eyes of Pharaoh,  in the eyes of his servants, to put a sword in their hand to slay us.
Exod. And Moses returned to Jehovah,  said, Lord, why have thou dealt ill with this people? Why is it that thou have sent me?
Exod. For since I came to Pharaoh to speak in thy name, he has dealt ill with this people, neither have thou delivered thy people at all.
Exod. And Jehovah said to Moses, Now thou shall see what I will do to Pharaoh. For by a strong hand he shall let them go,  by a strong hand he shall drive them out of his land.
Exod. And God spoke to Moses,  said to him, I am Jehovah.
Exod. And I appeared to Abraham, to Isaac,  to Jacob, as God Almighty,  I was not known by them by my name Jehovah.
Exod. And I also established my covenant with them, to give them the land of Canaan, the land of their sojourning, in which they sojourned.
Exod. And moreover I have heard the groaning of the sons of Israel, whom the Egyptians keep in bondage,  I have remembered my covenant.
Exod. Therefore say to the sons of Israel, I am Jehovah. And I will bring you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians,  I will rid you out of their bondage,  I will redeem you with an outstretched arm,  with great judgments.
Exod. And I will take you to me for a people,  I will be to you a God,  ye shall know that I am Jehovah your God, who brings you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians.
Exod. And I will bring you in to the land which I swore to give to Abraham, to Isaac,  to Jacob,  I will give it to you for a heritage. I am Jehovah.
Exod. And Moses spoke so to the sons of Israel,  they did not hearken to Moses for anguish of spirit,  for cruel bondage.
Exod. And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Exod. Go in, speak to Pharaoh king of Egypt, that he let the sons of Israel go out of his land.
Exod. And Moses spoke before Jehovah, saying, Behold, the sons of Israel have not hearkened to me, how then shall Pharaoh hear me, who am of uncircumcised lips?
Exod. And Jehovah spoke to Moses and to Aaron,  gave them an order to the sons of Israel,  to Pharaoh king of Egypt, to bring the sons of Israel out of the land of Egypt.
Exod. These are the heads of their fathers' houses. The sons of Reuben the firstborn of Israel: Hanoch,  Pallu, Hezron,  Carmi, these are the families of Reuben.
Exod. And the sons of Simeon: Jemuel,  Jamin,  Ohad,  Jachin,  Zohar,  Shaul the son of a Canaanite woman, these are the families of Simeon.
Exod. And these are the names of the sons of Levi according to their generations: Gershon,  Kohath,  Merari. And the years of the life of Levi were a hundred thirty-seven years.
Exod. The sons of Gershon: Libni and Shimei, according to their families.
Exod. And the sons of Kohath: Amram,  Izhar,  Hebron,  Uzziel. And the years of the life of Kohath were a hundred thirty-three years.
Exod. And the sons of Merari: Mahli and Mushi. These are the families of the Levites according to their generations.
Exod. And Amram took him Jochebed his father's sister to wife,  she bore him Aaron and Moses. And the years of the life of Amram were a hundred and thirty-seven years.
Exod. And the sons of Izhar: Korah,  Nepheg,  Zichri.
Exod. And the sons of Uzziel: Mishael,  Elzaphan,  Sithri.
Exod. And Aaron took him Elisheba, the daughter of Amminadab, the sister of Nahshon, to wife,  she bore him Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar.
Exod. And the sons of Korah: Assir,  Elkanah,  Abiasaph. These are the families of the Korahites.
Exod. And Eleazar Aaron's son took to him one of the daughters of Putiel to wife,  she bore to him Phinehas. These are the heads of the fathers of the Levites according to their families.
Exod. These are that Aaron and Moses, to whom Jehovah said, Bring out the sons of Israel from the land of Egypt according to their armies.
Exod. These are those who spoke to Pharaoh king of Egypt, to bring out the sons of Israel from Egypt. These are that Moses and Aaron.
Exod. And it came to pass on the day when Jehovah spoke to Moses in the land of Egypt,
Exod. that Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying, I am Jehovah. Speak thou to Pharaoh king of Egypt all that I speak to thee.
Exod. And Moses said before Jehovah, Behold, I am of uncircumcised lips,  how shall Pharaoh hearken to me?
Exod. And Jehovah said to Moses, See, I have made thee as God to Pharaoh,  Aaron thy brother shall be thy prophet.
Exod. Thou shall speak all that I command thee,  Aaron thy brother shall speak to Pharaoh, that he let the sons of Israel go out of his land.
Exod. And I will harden Pharaoh's heart,  multiply my signs and my wonders in the land of Egypt.
Exod. But Pharaoh will not hearken to you. And I will lay my hand upon Egypt,  bring forth my armies, my people the sons of Israel, out of the land of Egypt by great judgments.
Exod. And the Egyptians shall know that I am Jehovah, when I stretch forth my hand upon Egypt,  bring out the sons of Israel from among them.
Exod. And Moses and Aaron did so, as Jehovah commanded them, so they did.
Exod. And Moses was eighty years old,  Aaron eighty-three years old, when they spoke to Pharaoh.
Exod. And Jehovah spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying,
Exod. When Pharaoh shall speak to you, saying, Show a wonder for you, then thou shall say to Aaron, Take thy rod,  cast it down before Pharaoh, that it become a serpent.
Exod. And Moses and Aaron went in to Pharaoh. And they did so, as Jehovah had commanded,  Aaron cast down his rod before Pharaoh and before his servants,  it became a serpent.
Exod. Then Pharaoh also called for the wise men and the sorcerers. And they also, the magicians of Egypt, did in like manner with their enchantments.
Exod. For they cast down every man his rod,  they became serpents,  Aaron's rod swallowed up their rods.
Exod. And Pharaoh's heart was hardened,  he did not hearken to them, as Jehovah had spoken.
Exod. And Jehovah said to Moses, Pharaoh's heart is stubborn; he refuses to let the people go.
Exod. Get thee to Pharaoh in the morning, lo, he goes out to the water,  thou shall stand by the river's edge to meet him,  the rod which was turned to a serpent thou shall take in thy hand.
Exod. And thou shall say to him, Jehovah, the God of the Hebrews, has sent me to thee, saying, Let my people go, that they may serve me in the wilderness. And, behold, until now thou have not hearkened.
Exod. Thus says Jehovah, In this thou shall know that I am Jehovah. Behold, I will smite with the rod that is in my hand upon the waters which are in the river,  they shall be turned to blood.
Exod. And the fish that are in the river shall die,  the river shall become foul,  the Egyptians shall loathe to drink water from the river.
Exod. And Jehovah said to Moses, Say to Aaron, Take thy rod,  stretch out thy hand over the waters of Egypt, over their rivers, over their streams,  over their pools,  over all their ponds of water, that they may become blood,  there shall be blood throughout all the land of Egypt, both in vessels of wood and in vessels of stone.
Exod. And Moses and Aaron did so, as Jehovah commanded. And he lifted up the rod,  smote the waters that were in the river, in the sight of Pharaoh,  in the sight of his servants,  all the waters that were in the river were turned to blood.
Exod. And the fish that were in the river died,  the river became foul,  the Egyptians could not drink water from the river. And the blood was throughout all the land of Egypt.
Exod. And the magicians of Egypt did in like manner with their enchantments. And Pharaoh's heart was hardened,  he did not hearken to them, as Jehovah had spoken.
Exod. And Pharaoh turned and went into his house, neither did he lay even this to heart.
Exod. And all the Egyptians dug round about the river for water to drink, for they could not drink of the water of the river.
Exod. And seven days were fulfilled, after Jehovah had smitten the river.
Exod. And Jehovah spoke to Moses, Go in to Pharaoh,  say to him, Thus says Jehovah, Let my people go, that they may serve me.
Exod. And if thou refuse to let them go, behold, I will smite all thy borders with frogs.
Exod. And the river shall swarm with frogs, which shall go up and come into thy house,  into thy bedchamber,  upon thy bed,  into the house of thy servants,  upon thy people,  into thine ovens,  into thy kneading-troughs.
Exod. And the frogs shall come up both upon thee,  upon thy people,  upon all thy servants.
Exod. And Jehovah said to Moses, Say to Aaron, Stretch forth thy hand with thy rod over the rivers, over the streams,  over the pools,  cause frogs to come up upon the land of Egypt.
Exod. And Aaron stretched out his hand over the waters of Egypt,  the frogs came up,  covered the land of Egypt.
Exod. And the magicians did in like manner with their enchantments,  brought up frogs upon the land of Egypt.
Exod. Then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron,  said, Entreat Jehovah, that he take away the frogs from me,  from my people,  I will let the people go, that they may sacrifice to Jehovah.
Exod. And Moses said to Pharaoh, Have this honor over me: When shall I entreat for thee,  for thy servants,  for thy people, that the frogs be destroyed from thee and thy houses,  remain in the river only?
Exod. And he said, Tomorrow. And he said, Be it according to thy word, that thou may know that there is none like Jehovah our God.
Exod. And the frogs shall depart from thee,  from thy houses,  from thy servants,  from thy people, they shall remain in the river only.
Exod. And Moses and Aaron went out from Pharaoh. And Moses cried to Jehovah concerning the frogs which he had brought upon Pharaoh.
Exod. And Jehovah did according to the word of Moses. And the frogs died out of the houses, out of the courts,  out of the fields.
Exod. And they gathered them together in heaps,  the land stank.
Exod. But when Pharaoh saw that there was relief, he hardened his heart,  did not hearken to them, as Jehovah had spoken.
Exod. And Jehovah said to Moses, Say to Aaron, Stretch out thy rod,  smite the dust of the earth, that it may become lice throughout all the land of Egypt.
Exod. And they did so. And Aaron stretched out his hand with his rod,  smote the dust of the earth. And there were lice upon man,  upon beast; all the dust of the earth became lice throughout all the land of Egypt.
Exod. And the magicians did so with their enchantments to bring forth lice,  they could not. And there were lice upon man,  upon beast.
Exod. Then the magicians said to Pharaoh, This is the finger of God. And Pharaoh's heart was hardened,  he did not hearken to them, as Jehovah had spoken.
Exod. And Jehovah said to Moses, Rise up early in the morning,  stand before Pharaoh. Lo, he comes forth to the water. And say to him, Thus says Jehovah, Let my people go, that they may serve me.
Exod. Else, if thou will not let my people go, behold, I will send swarms of flies upon thee,  upon they servants,  upon thy people,  into thy houses. And the houses of the Egyptians shall be full of swarms of flies,  also the ground on which they are.
Exod. And in that day I will set apart the land of Goshen, in which my people dwell, that no swarms of flies shall be there, to the end thou may know that I am Jehovah in the midst of the earth.
Exod. And I will put a division between my people and thy people. This sign shall be by tomorrow.
Exod. And Jehovah did so,  there came grievous swarms of flies into the house of Pharaoh,  into his servants' houses. And in all the land of Egypt the land was corrupted because of the swarms of flies.
Exod. And Pharaoh called for Moses and for Aaron,  said, Go ye, sacrifice to your God in the land.
Exod. And Moses said, It is not right to do so, for we shall sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians to Jehovah our God. Lo, shall we sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians before their eyes,  will they not stone us?
Exod. We will go three days' journey into the wilderness,  sacrifice to Jehovah our God, as he shall command us.
Exod. And Pharaoh said, I will let you go, that ye may sacrifice to Jehovah your God in the wilderness, only ye shall not go very far away. Entreat for me.
Exod. And Moses said, Behold, I go out from thee,  I will entreat Jehovah that the swarms of flies may depart from Pharaoh, from his servants,  from his people, tomorrow. Only let not Pharaoh deal deceitfully any more in not letting the people go to sacrifice to Jehovah.
Exod. And Moses went out from Pharaoh,  entreated Jehovah.
Exod. And Jehovah did according to the word of Moses,  he removed the swarms of flies from Pharaoh, from his servants,  from his people; there remained not one.
Exod. And Pharaoh hardened his heart this time also,  he did not let the people go.
Exod. Then Jehovah said to Moses, Go in to Pharaoh,  tell him, Thus says Jehovah, the God of the Hebrews, Let my people go, that they may serve me.
Exod. For if thou refuse to let them go,  will still hold them,
Exod. behold, the hand of Jehovah is upon thy cattle which are in the field, upon the horses, upon the donkeys, upon the camels, upon the herds,  upon the flocks-a very grievous pestilence.
Exod. And Jehovah shall make a distinction between the cattle of Israel and the cattle of Egypt,  there shall nothing die of all that belongs to the sons of Israel.
Exod. And Jehovah appointed a set time, saying, Tomorrow Jehovah shall do this thing in the land.
Exod. And Jehovah did that thing on the morrow,  all the cattle of Egypt died,  of the cattle of the sons of Israel not one died.
Exod. And Pharaoh sent, , behold, there was not so much as one of the cattle of the Israelites dead. But the heart of Pharaoh was stubborn,  he did not let the people go.
Exod. And Jehovah said to Moses and to Aaron, Take to you handfuls of ashes of the furnace,  let Moses sprinkle it toward heaven in the sight of Pharaoh.
Exod. And it shall become small dust over all the land of Egypt,  shall be a boil breaking forth with sores upon man and upon beast, throughout all the land of Egypt.
Exod. And they took ashes of the furnace,  stood before Pharaoh,  Moses sprinkled it up toward heaven,  it became a boil breaking forth with sores upon man and upon beast.
Exod. And the magicians could not stand before Moses because of the boils, for the boils were upon the magicians,  upon all the Egyptians.
Exod. And Jehovah hardened the heart of Pharaoh,  he did not hearken to them, as Jehovah had spoken to Moses.
Exod. And Jehovah said to Moses, Rise up early in the morning,  stand before Pharaoh,  say to him, Thus says Jehovah, the God of the Hebrews, Let my people go, that they may serve me.
Exod. For this time I will send all my plagues upon thy heart,  upon thy servants,  upon thy people, that thou may know that there is none like me in all the earth.
Exod. For now I have put forth my hand,  smitten thee and thy people with pestilence,  thou have been cut off from the earth.
Exod. But indeed for this cause I have raised thee up, to display in thee my power,  that my name may be proclaimed in all the earth.
Exod. As yet thou exalt thyself against my people, that thou will not let them go?
Exod. Behold, tomorrow about this time I will cause it to rain a very grievous hail, such as has not been in Egypt since the day it was founded even until now.
Exod. Now therefore send, hasten in thy cattle and all that thou have in the field, for every man and beast that shall be found in the field,  shall not be brought home, the hail shall come down upon them,  they shall die.
Exod. He who feared the word of Jehovah among the servants of Pharaoh made his servants and his cattle flee into the houses.
Exod. And he who did not regard the word of Jehovah left his servants and his cattle in the field.
Exod. And Jehovah said to Moses, Stretch forth thy hand toward heaven, that there may be hail in all the land of Egypt, upon man,  upon beast,  upon every herb of the field, throughout the land of Egypt.
Exod. And Moses stretched forth his rod toward heaven,  Jehovah sent thunder and hail,  fire ran down to the earth,  Jehovah rained hail upon the land of Egypt.
Exod. So there was hail,  fire mingled with the hail, very grievous, such as had not been in all the land of Egypt since it became a nation.
Exod. And throughout all the land of Egypt the hail smote all that was in the field, both man and beast,  the hail smote every herb of the field,  broke every tree of the field.
Exod. Only in the land of Goshen, where the sons of Israel were, was there no hail.
Exod. And Pharaoh sent,  called for Moses and Aaron,  said to them, I have sinned this time. Jehovah is righteous,  I and my people are wicked.
Exod. Entreat Jehovah, for there has been enough of these mighty thunderings and hail,  I will let you go,  ye shall stay no longer.
Exod. And Moses said to him, As soon as I am gone out of the city, I will spread abroad my hands to Jehovah. The thunders shall cease, neither shall there be any more hail, that thou may know that the earth is Jehovah's.
Exod. But as for thee and thy servants, I know that ye will not yet fear Jehovah God.
Exod. And the flax and the barley were smitten, for the barley was in the ear,  the flax was in bloom.
Exod. But the wheat and the rye were not smitten, for they were not grown up.
Exod. And Moses went out of the city from Pharaoh,  spread abroad his hands to Jehovah,  the thunders and hail ceased,  the rain was not poured upon the earth.
Exod. And when Pharaoh saw that the rain and the hail and the thunders were ceased, he sinned yet more,  hardened his heart, he and his servants.
Exod. And the heart of Pharaoh was hardened,  he did not let the sons of Israel go, as Jehovah had spoken by Moses.
Exod. And Jehovah said to Moses, Go in to Pharaoh, for I have hardened his heart,  the heart of his servants, that I may show these my signs in the midst of them,
Exod. and that thou may tell in the ears of thy son,  of thy son's son, what things I have wrought upon Egypt,  my signs which I have done among them, that ye may know that I am Jehovah.
Exod. And Moses and Aaron went in to Pharaoh,  said to him, Thus says Jehovah, the God of the Hebrews, How long will thou refuse to humble thyself before me? Let my people go, that they may serve me.
Exod. Else, if thou refuse to let my people go, behold, tomorrow I will bring locusts into thy border.
Exod. And they shall cover the face of the earth, so that no man is able to see the ground. And they shall eat the residue of that which is escaped, which remains to you from the hail,  shall eat every tree which grows for you out of the field.
Exod. And thy houses shall be filled,  the houses of all thy servants,  the houses of all the Egyptians, as neither thy fathers nor thy fathers' fathers have seen, since the day that they were upon the earth to this day. And he turned,  went out from Pharaoh.
Exod. And Pharaoh's servants said to him, How long shall this man be a snare to us? Let the men go, that they may serve Jehovah their God. Do thou not yet know that Egypt is destroyed?
Exod. And Moses and Aaron were brought again to Pharaoh. And he said to them, Go, serve Jehovah your God,  who are those who shall go?
Exod. And Moses said, We will go with our young and with our old, with our sons and with our daughters, with our flocks and with our herds will we go, for we must hold a feast to Jehovah.
Exod. And he said to them, So be Jehovah with you, as I will let you go,  your little ones. Look, evil is before you.
Exod. Not so. Go ye now who are men,  serve Jehovah, for that is what ye desire. And they were driven out from Pharaoh's presence.
Exod. And Jehovah said to Moses, Stretch out thy hand over the land of Egypt for the locusts, that they may come up upon the land of Egypt,  eat every herb of the land, even all that the hail has left.
Exod. And Moses stretched forth his rod over the land of Egypt,  Jehovah brought an east wind upon the land all that day,  all the night,  when it was morning, the east wind brought the locusts.
Exod. And the locusts went up over all the land of Egypt,  rested in all the borders of Egypt, very grievous were they, before them there were no such locusts as they, neither after them shall be such.
Exod. For they covered the face of the whole ground, so that the land was darkened,  they ate every herb of the land,  all the fruit of the trees which the hail had left. And there remained not any green thing, either tree nor herb of the field, through all the land of Egypt.
Exod. Then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron in haste,  he said, I have sinned against Jehovah your God,  against you.
Exod. Now therefore forgive, I pray thee, my sin only this once,  entreat Jehovah your God, that he may only take away from me this death.
Exod. And he went out from Pharaoh,  entreated Jehovah.
Exod. And Jehovah turned an exceedingly strong west wind, which took up the locusts,  drove them into the Red Sea. There remained not one locust in all the border of Egypt.
Exod. But Jehovah hardened Pharaoh's heart,  he did not let the sons of Israel go.
Exod. And Jehovah said to Moses, Stretch out thy hand toward heaven, that there may be darkness over the land of Egypt, even darkness which may be felt.
Exod. And Moses stretched forth his hand toward heaven,  there was a thick darkness in all the land of Egypt three days,
Exod. they did not see each other, neither did anyone rise from his place for three days,  all the sons of Israel had light in their dwellings.
Exod. And Pharaoh called to Moses,  said, Go ye, serve Jehovah, only let your flocks and your herds stay. Let your little ones also go with you.
Exod. And Moses said, Thou must also give into our hand sacrifices and burnt offerings, that we may sacrifice to Jehovah our God.
Exod. Our cattle shall also go with us, there shall not a hoof be left behind, for we must take of it to serve Jehovah our God,  we do not know with what we must serve Jehovah, until we come there.
Exod. But Jehovah hardened Pharaoh's heart,  he would not let them go.
Exod. And Pharaoh said to him, Get thee from me. Take heed to thyself, see my face no more, for in the day thou see my face thou shall die.
Exod. And Moses said, Thou have spoken well. I will see thy face again no more.
Exod. And Jehovah said to Moses, Yet one plague more I will bring upon Pharaoh,  upon Egypt, afterwards he will let you go from here. When he shall let you go, he shall surely thrust you out from here altogether.
Exod. Speak now in the ears of the people,  let them ask every man of his neighbor,  every woman of her neighbor, jewels of silver,  jewels of gold.
Exod. And Jehovah gave the people favor in the sight of the Egyptians. Moreover the man Moses was very great in the land of Egypt, in the sight of Pharaoh's servants,  in the sight of the people.
Exod. And Moses said, Thus says Jehovah, About midnight I will go out into the midst of Egypt,
Exod. and all the firstborn in the land of Egypt shall die, from the firstborn of Pharaoh who sits upon his throne, even to the firstborn of the maid-servant that is behind the mill,  all the firstborn of cattle.
Exod. And there shall be a great cry throughout all the land of Egypt, such as there has not been, nor shall be any more.
Exod. But against any of the sons of Israel shall not a dog move his tongue, against man or beast, that ye may know how that Jehovah makes a distinction between the Egyptians and Israel.
Exod. And all these thy servants shall come down to me,  bow themselves down to me, saying, Get thee out,  all the people who follow thee. And after that I will go out. And he went out from Pharaoh in hot anger.
Exod. And Jehovah said to Moses, Pharaoh will not hearken to you, that my wonders may be multiplied in the land of Egypt.
Exod. And Moses and Aaron did all these wonders before Pharaoh. And Jehovah hardened Pharaoh's heart,  he did not let the sons of Israel go out of his land.
Exod. And Jehovah spoke to Moses and Aaron in the land of Egypt, saying,
Exod. This month shall be to you the beginning of months; it shall be the first month of the year to you.
Exod. Speak ye to all the congregation of Israel, saying, In the tenth day of this month they shall take to them every man a lamb, according to their fathers' houses, a lamb for a household.
Exod. And if the household be too little for a lamb, then he and his neighbor next to his house shall take one according to the number of the souls, according to every man's eating ye shall make your count for the lamb.
Exod. Your lamb shall be without blemish, a male a year old. Ye shall take it from the sheep, or from the goats.
Exod. And ye shall keep it until the fourteenth day of the same month,  the whole assembly of the congregation of Israel shall kill it at evening.
Exod. And they shall take of the blood,  put it on the two side-posts and on the lintel upon the houses in which they shall eat it.
Exod. And they shall eat the flesh in that night, roasted with fire,  unleavened bread, with bitter herbs they shall eat it.
Exod. Do not eat of it raw, nor boiled at all with water,  roasted with fire, its head with its legs and with the inwards of it.
Exod. And ye shall let nothing of it remain until the morning,  that which remains of it until the morning ye shall burn with fire.
Exod. And thus ye shall eat it: with your loins girded, your shoes on your feet,  your staff in your hand. And ye shall eat it in haste. It is Jehovah's Passover.
Exod. For I will go through the land of Egypt in that night,  will smite all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, both man and beast,  against all the gods of Egypt I will execute judgments. I am Jehovah.
Exod. And the blood shall be to you for a sign upon the houses where ye are. And when I see the blood, I will pass over you,  there shall no plague be upon you to destroy you, when I smite the land of Egypt.
Exod. And this day shall be to you for a memorial,  ye shall keep it a feast to Jehovah; throughout your generations ye shall keep it a feast by an ordinance forever.
Exod. Seven days ye shall eat unleavened bread, even the first day ye shall put away leaven out of your houses, for whoever eats leavened bread from the first day until the seventh day, that soul shall be cut off from Israel.
Exod. And in the first day there shall be to you a holy convocation,  in the seventh day a holy convocation, no manner of work shall be done in them, except that which every man must eat, that only may be done by you.
Exod. And ye shall observe the feast of unleavened bread, for in this selfsame day I have brought your armies out of the land of Egypt. Therefore ye shall observe this day throughout your generations by an ordinance forever.
Exod. In the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month at evening, ye shall eat unleavened bread, until the twenty-first day of the month at evening.
Exod. Seven days there shall be no leaven found in your houses, for whoever eats that which is leavened, that soul shall be cut off from the congregation of Israel, whether he be a sojourner, or one who is born in the land.
Exod. Ye shall eat nothing leavened, in all your habitations ye shall eat unleavened bread.
Exod. Then Moses called for all the elders of Israel,  said to them, Draw out,  take to you lambs according to your families,  kill the Passover.
Exod. And ye shall take a bunch of hyssop,  dip it in the blood that is in the basin,  strike the lintel and the two side-posts with the blood that is in the basin,  none of you shall go out of the door of his house until the morning.
Exod. For Jehovah will pass through to smite the Egyptians,  when he sees the blood upon the lintel,  on the two side-posts, Jehovah will pass over the door,  will not allow the destroyer to come in to your houses to smite you.
Exod. And ye shall observe this thing for an ordinance to thee and to thy sons forever.
Exod. And it shall come to pass, when ye have come to the land which Jehovah will give you, according as he has promised, that ye shall keep this service.
Exod. And it shall come to pass, when your sons shall say to you, What do ye mean by this service?
Exod. that ye shall say, It is the sacrifice of Jehovah's Passover, who passed over the houses of the sons of Israel in Egypt, when he smote the Egyptians,  delivered our houses. And the people bowed the head and worshiped.
Exod. And the sons of Israel went and did so, as Jehovah had commanded Moses and Aaron, so did they.
Exod. And it came to pass at midnight, that Jehovah smote all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, from the firstborn of Pharaoh who sat on his throne to the firstborn of the captive who was in the dungeon,  all the firstborn of cattle.
Exod. And Pharaoh rose up in the night, he,  all his servants,  all the Egyptians,  there was a great cry in Egypt, for there was not a house where there was not one dead.
Exod. And he called for Moses and Aaron by night,  said, Rise up, get you forth from among my people, both ye and the sons of Israel,  go, serve Jehovah, as ye have said.
Exod. Take both your flocks and your herds, as ye have said,  be gone,  bless me also.
Exod. And the Egyptians were urgent upon the people, to send them out of the land in haste, for they said, We are all dead men.
Exod. And the people took their dough before it was leavened, their kneading-troughs being bound up in their clothes upon their shoulders.
Exod. And the sons of Israel did according to the word of Moses,  they asked of the Egyptians jewels of silver,  jewels of gold,  raiment.
Exod. And Jehovah gave the people favor in the sight of the Egyptians, so that they let them have what they asked. And they despoiled the Egyptians.
Exod. And the sons of Israel journeyed from Rameses to Succoth, about six hundred thousand on foot who were men, besides children.
Exod. And a mixed multitude also went up with them,  flocks,  herds, even very much cattle.
Exod. And they baked unleavened cakes of the dough which they brought forth out of Egypt, for it was not leavened, because they were thrust out of Egypt,  could not tarry, neither had they prepared for themselves any provisions.
Exod. Now the time that the sons of Israel dwelt in the land of Egypt and the land of Canaan was four hundred and thirty years.
Exod. And it came to pass at the end of four hundred and thirty years, even the selfsame day it came to pass, that all the armies of Jehovah went out from the land of Egypt.
Exod. It is a night to be much observed to Jehovah for bringing them out from the land of Egypt. This is that night of Jehovah, to be much observed of all the sons of Israel throughout their generations.
Exod. And Jehovah said to Moses and Aaron, This is the ordinance of the Passover. There shall no foreigner eat of it,
Exod. but every man's servant who is bought for money, when thou have circumcised him, then he shall eat of it.
Exod. A sojourner and a hired servant shall not eat of it.
Exod. In one house it shall be eaten. Thou shall not carry forth any of the flesh abroad out of the house, neither shall ye break a bone of it.
Exod. All the congregation of Israel shall keep it.
Exod. And when a stranger shall sojourn with thee,  will keep the Passover to Jehovah, let all his males be circumcised,  then let him come near and keep it,  he shall be as one who is born in the land,  no uncircumcised man shall eat of it.
Exod. One law shall be to him who is home-born,  to the stranger who sojourns among you.
Exod. Thus did all the sons of Israel, as Jehovah commanded Moses and Aaron, so did they.
Exod. And it came to pass the selfsame day, that Jehovah brought the sons of Israel out of the land of Egypt by their armies.
Exod. And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Exod. Sanctify to me all the firstborn, whatever opens the womb among the sons of Israel. Both of man and of beast, it is mine.
Exod. And Moses said to the people, Remember this day, in which ye came out from Egypt, out of the house of bondage, for by strength of hand Jehovah brought you out from this place. There shall no leavened bread be eaten.
Exod. This day ye go forth in the month Abib.
Exod. And it shall be, when Jehovah shall bring thee into the land of the Canaanite,  the Hittite,  the Amorite,  the Hivite,  the Jebusite, which he swore to thy fathers to give thee, a land flowing with milk and honey, that thou shall keep this service in this month.
Exod. Seven days thou shall eat unleavened bread,  in the seventh day shall be a feast to Jehovah.
Exod. Unleavened bread shall be eaten throughout the seven days,  there shall no leavened bread be seen with thee, neither shall there be leaven seen with thee in all thy borders.
Exod. And thou shall tell thy son in that day, saying, It is because of that which Jehovah did for me when I came forth out of Egypt.
Exod. And it shall be for a sign to thee upon thy hand,  for a memorial between thine eyes, that the law of Jehovah may be in thy mouth, for with a strong hand has Jehovah brought thee out of Egypt.
Exod. Thou shall therefore keep this ordinance in its season from year to year.
Exod. And it shall be, when Jehovah shall bring thee into the land of the Canaanite, as he swore to thee and to thy fathers,  shall give it to thee,
Exod. that thou shall set apart to Jehovah all that opens the womb. And every firstling which thou have that comes of a beast, the males shall be Jehovah's.
Exod. And every firstling of a donkey thou shall redeem with a lamb,  if thou will not redeem it, then thou shall break its neck. And all the firstborn of man among thy sons thou shall redeem.
Exod. And it shall be, when thy son asks thee in time to come, saying, What is this? that thou shall say to him, By strength of hand Jehovah brought us out from Egypt, from the house of bondage.
Exod. And it came to pass, when Pharaoh would hardly let us go, that Jehovah slew all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, both the firstborn of man,  the firstborn of beast. Therefore I sacrifice to Jehovah all that opens the womb, being males,  all the firstborn of my sons I redeem.
Exod. And it shall be for a sign upon thy hand,  for frontlets between thine eyes, for by strength of hand Jehovah brought us forth out of Egypt.
Exod. And it came to pass, when Pharaoh had let the people go, that God led them not by the way of the land of the Philistines, although that was near. For God said, Lest perhaps the people regret when they see war,  they return to Egypt.
Exod. But God led the people about, by the way of the wilderness by the Red Sea. And the sons of Israel went up armed out of the land of Egypt.
Exod. And Moses took the bones of Joseph with him, for he had strictly sworn the sons of Israel, saying, God will surely visit you,  ye shall carry up my bones away from here with you.
Exod. And they took their journey from Succoth,  encamped in Etham, in the edge of the wilderness.
Exod. And Jehovah went before them by day in a pillar of cloud, to lead them the way,  by night in a pillar of fire, to give them light, that they might go by day and by night.
Exod. The pillar of cloud by day,  the pillar of fire by night departed not from before the people.
Exod. And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Exod. Speak to the sons of Israel, that they turn back and encamp before Pihahiroth, between Migdol and the sea, before Baal-zephon. Ye shall encamp opposite it by the sea.
Exod. And Pharaoh will say of the sons of Israel, They are entangled in the land; the wilderness has shut them in.
Exod. And I will harden Pharaoh's heart,  he shall follow after them,  I will get for me honor upon Pharaoh,  upon all his army,  the Egyptians shall know that I am Jehovah. And they did so.
Exod. And it was told the king of Egypt that the people were fled. And the heart of Pharaoh and of his servants was changed towards the people,  they said, What is this we have done, that we have let Israel go from serving us?
Exod. And he made ready his chariot,  took his people with him.
Exod. And he took six hundred chosen chariots,  all the chariots of Egypt,  captains over all of them.
Exod. And Jehovah hardened the heart of Pharaoh king of Egypt,  he pursued after the sons of Israel, for the sons of Israel went out with a high hand.
Exod. And the Egyptians pursued after them, all the horses and chariots of Pharaoh,  his horsemen,  his army,  overtook them encamping by the sea, beside Pihahiroth, before Baal-zephon.
Exod. And when Pharaoh drew near, the sons of Israel lifted up their eyes, , behold, the Egyptians were marching after them,  they were very afraid. And the sons of Israel cried out to Jehovah,
Exod. and they said to Moses, Because there were no graves in Egypt, have thou taken us away to die in the wilderness? Why have thou dealt thus with us, to bring us forth out of Egypt?
Exod. Is not this the word that we spoke to thee in Egypt, saying, Let us alone, that we may serve the Egyptians? For it were better for us to serve the Egyptians, than that we should die in the wilderness.
Exod. And Moses said to the people, Fear ye not. Stand still,  see the salvation of Jehovah, which he will work for you today, for the Egyptians whom ye have seen today, ye shall see them again no more forever.
Exod. Jehovah will fight for you,  ye shall keep silent.
Exod. And Jehovah said to Moses, Why do thou cry to me? Speak to the sons of Israel, that they go forward.
Exod. And lift thou up thy rod,  stretch out thy hand over the sea,  divide it,  the sons of Israel shall go into the midst of the sea on dry ground.
Exod. And I, behold, I will harden the hearts of the Egyptians,  they shall go in after them,  I will get for me honor upon Pharaoh,  upon all his army, upon his chariots,  upon his horsemen.
Exod. And the Egyptians shall know that I am Jehovah, when I have gotten for me honor upon Pharaoh, upon his chariots,  upon his horsemen.
Exod. And the agent of God, who went before the camp of Israel, moved and went behind them,  the pillar of cloud moved from before them,  stood behind them.
Exod. And it came between the camp of Egypt and the camp of Israel. And the cloud and the darkness was there, yet it gave light by night. And the one did not come near the other all the night.
Exod. And Moses stretched out his hand over the sea,  Jehovah caused the sea to go back by a strong east wind all the night,  made the sea dry land,  the waters were divided.
Exod. And the sons of Israel went into the midst of the sea upon the dry ground,  the waters were a wall to them on their right hand,  on their left.
Exod. And the Egyptians pursued,  went in after them into the midst of the sea, all Pharaoh's horses, his chariots,  his horsemen.
Exod. And it came to pass in the morning watch, that Jehovah looked forth upon the army of the Egyptians through the pillar of fire and of cloud,  troubled the army of the Egyptians.
Exod. And he took off their chariot wheels,  they drove them with difficulty, so that the Egyptians said, Let us flee from the face of Israel, for Jehovah fights for them against the Egyptians.
Exod. And Jehovah said to Moses, Stretch out thy hand over the sea, that the waters may come again upon the Egyptians, upon their chariots,  upon their horsemen.
Exod. And Moses stretched forth his hand over the sea,  the sea returned to its strength when the morning appeared,  the Egyptians fled against it,  Jehovah overthrew the Egyptians in the midst of the sea.
Exod. And the waters returned,  covered the chariots,  the horsemen, even all the army of Pharaoh who went in after them into the sea, there remained not so much as one of them.
Exod. But the sons of Israel walked upon dry land in the midst of the sea,  the waters were a wall to them on their right hand,  on their left.
Exod. Thus Jehovah saved Israel that day out of the hand of the Egyptians,  Israel saw the Egyptians dead upon the sea-shore.
Exod. And Israel saw the great work which Jehovah did upon the Egyptians. And the people feared Jehovah,  they believed in Jehovah,  in his servant Moses.
Exod. Then Moses and the sons of Israel sang this song to Jehovah,  spoke, saying, I will sing to Jehovah, for he has triumphed gloriously. The horse and his rider he has thrown into the sea.
Exod. Jehovah is my strength and song,  he has become my salvation. This is my God,  I will praise him, my father's God,  I will exalt him.
Exod. Jehovah is a man of war. Jehovah is his name.
Exod. Pharaoh's chariots and his army he has cast into the sea,  his chosen captains are sunk in the Red Sea.
Exod. The deeps cover them. They went down into the depths like a stone.
Exod. Thy right hand, O Jehovah, is glorious in power. Thy right hand, O Jehovah, dashes the enemy in pieces.
Exod. And in the greatness of thine excellency thou overthrow those who rise up against thee. Thou send forth thy wrath, it consumes them as stubble.
Exod. And with the blast of thy nostrils the waters were piled up. The floods stood up as a heap. The deeps were congealed in the heart of the sea.
Exod. The enemy said, I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil, my desire shall be satisfied upon them. I will draw my sword, my hand shall destroy them.
Exod. Thou did blow with thy wind, the sea covered them. They sank as lead in the mighty waters.
Exod. Who is like thee, O Jehovah, among the gods? Who is like thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders?
Exod. Thou stretched out thy right hand, the earth swallowed them.
Exod. Thou in thy loving kindness have led the people that thou have redeemed. Thou have guided them in thy strength to thy holy habitation.
Exod. The peoples have heard, they tremble. Pangs have taken hold on the inhabitants of Philistia.
Exod. Then the chiefs of Edom were dismayed, the mighty men of Moab. Trembling takes hold upon them. All the inhabitants of Canaan are melted away.
Exod. Terror and dread falls upon them. By the greatness of thine arm they are as still as a stone, till thy people pass over, O Jehovah, till the people pass over whom thou have purchased.
Exod. Thou will bring them in,  plant them on the mountain of thine inheritance, the place, O Jehovah, which thou have made for thee to dwell in, the sanctuary, O Lord, which thy hands have established.
Exod. Jehovah shall reign forever and ever.
Exod. For the horses of Pharaoh went in with his chariots and with his horsemen into the sea,  Jehovah brought back the waters of the sea upon them,  the sons of Israel walked on dry land in the midst of the sea.
Exod. And Miriam the prophetess, the sister of Aaron, took a timbrel in her hand,  all the women went out after her with timbrels and with dances.
Exod. And Miriam answered them, Sing ye to Jehovah, for he has triumphed gloriously. The horse and his rider he has thrown into the sea.
Exod. And Moses led Israel onward from the Red Sea,  they went out into the wilderness of Shur. And they went three days in the wilderness,  found no water.
Exod. And when they came to Marah, they could not drink of the waters of Marah, for they were bitter. Therefore the name of it was called Marah.
Exod. And the people murmured against Moses, saying, What shall we drink?
Exod. And he cried to Jehovah. And Jehovah showed him a tree,  he cast it into the waters,  the waters were made sweet. There he made for them a statute and an ordinance,  there he proved them,
Exod. and he said, If thou will diligently hearken to the voice of Jehovah thy God,  will do that which is right in his eyes,  will give ear to his commandments,  keep all his statutes, I will put none of the diseases upon thee, which I have put upon the Egyptians, for I am Jehovah who heals thee.
Exod. And they came to Elim, where were twelve springs of water,  seventy palm trees,  they encamped there by the waters.
Exod. And they took their journey from Elim. And all the congregation of the sons of Israel came to the wilderness of Sin, which is between Elim and Sinai, on the fifteenth day of the second month after their departing out of the land of Egypt.
Exod. And the whole congregation of the sons of Israel murmured against Moses and against Aaron in the wilderness.
Exod. And the sons of Israel said to them, Would that we had died by the hand of Jehovah in the land of Egypt, when we sat by the flesh-pots, when we ate bread to the full, for ye have brought us forth into this wilderness, to kill this whole assembly with hunger.
Exod. Then Jehovah said to Moses, Behold, I will rain bread from heaven for you,  the people shall go out and gather a day's portion every day, that I may prove them, whether they will walk in my law, or not.
Exod. And it shall come to pass on the sixth day, that they shall prepare that which they bring in,  it shall be twice as much as they gather daily.
Exod. And Moses and Aaron said to all the sons of Israel, At evening, then ye shall know that Jehovah has brought you out from the land of Egypt,
Exod. and in the morning, then ye shall see the glory of Jehovah, for he hears your murmurings against Jehovah. And what are we, that ye murmur against us?
Exod. And Moses said, This shall be when Jehovah shall give you flesh to eat in the evening,  bread to the full in the morning, for that Jehovah hears your murmurings which ye murmur against him. And what are we? Your murmurings are not against us,  against Jehovah.
Exod. And Moses said to Aaron, Say to all the congregation of the sons of Israel, Come near before Jehovah, for he has heard your murmurings.
Exod. And it came to pass, as Aaron spoke to the whole congregation of the sons of Israel, that they looked toward the wilderness, , behold, the glory of Jehovah appeared in the cloud.
Exod. And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Exod. I have heard the murmurings of the sons of Israel. Speak to them, saying, At evening ye shall eat flesh,  in the morning ye shall be filled with bread. And ye shall know that I am Jehovah your God.
Exod. And it came to pass at evening, that the quails came up,  covered the camp. And in the morning the dew lay round about the camp,
Exod. and when the dew that lay was gone up, behold, upon the face of the wilderness a small round thing, small as the hoarfrost on the ground.
Exod. And when the sons of Israel saw it, they said one to another, What is it? For they knew not what it was. And Moses said to them, It is the bread which Jehovah has given you to eat.
Exod. This is the thing which Jehovah has commanded, Gather ye of it every man according to his eating, an omer a head. According to the number of your persons, ye shall take it, every man for those who are in his tent.
Exod. And the sons of Israel did so,  gathered, some more, some less.
Exod. And when they measured it with an omer, he who gathered much had nothing over,  he who gathered little had no lack; they gathered every man according to his eating.
Exod. And Moses said to them, Let no man leave of it till the morning.
Exod. Notwithstanding they did not hearken to Moses,  some of them left of it until the morning,  it bred worms,  became foul,  Moses was angry with them.
Exod. And they gathered it morning by morning, every man according to his eating. And when the sun grew hot, it melted.
Exod. And it came to pass, that on the sixth day they gathered twice as much bread, two omers for each one. And all the rulers of the congregation came and told Moses.
Exod. And he said to them, This is that which Jehovah has spoken, Tomorrow is a solemn rest, a holy sabbath to Jehovah. Bake that which ye will bake,  boil that which ye will boil,  all that remains over lay up for you to be kept until the morning.
Exod. And they laid it up till the morning, as Moses bade,  it did not become foul, neither was there any worm in it.
Exod. And Moses said, Eat that today, for today is a sabbath to Jehovah. Today ye shall not find it in the field.
Exod. Six days ye shall gather it,  on the seventh day is the sabbath, there shall be none in it.
Exod. And it came to pass on the seventh day, that some of the people went out to gather,  they found none.
Exod. And Jehovah said to Moses, How long do ye refuse to keep my commandments and my laws?
Exod. See, because Jehovah has given you the sabbath, therefore he gives you on the sixth day the bread of two days. Abide ye every man in his place. Let no man go out of his place on the seventh day.
Exod. So the people rested on the seventh day.
Exod. And the house of Israel called the name of it Manna. And it was like coriander seed, white,  the taste of it was like wafers with honey.
Exod. And Moses said, This is the thing which Jehovah has commanded. Let an omerful of it be kept throughout your generations, that they may see the bread with which I fed you in the wilderness, when I brought you forth from the land of Egypt.
Exod. And Moses said to Aaron, Take a pot,  put an omerful of manna in it,  lay it up before Jehovah, to be kept throughout your generations.
Exod. As Jehovah commanded Moses, so Aaron laid it up before the Testimony, to be kept.
Exod. And the sons of Israel ate the manna forty years, until they came to a land inhabited. They ate the manna until they came to the borders of the land of Canaan.
Exod. Now an omer is the tenth part of an ephah.
Exod. And all the congregation of the sons of Israel journeyed from the wilderness of Sin, by their journeys, according to the commandment of Jehovah,  encamped in Rephidim. And there was no water for the people to drink.
Exod. Therefore the people contended with Moses,  said, Give us water that we may drink. And Moses said to them, Why do ye contend with me? Why do ye challenge Jehovah?
Exod. And the people thirsted there for water. And the people murmured against Moses,  said, Why have thou brought us up out of Egypt, to kill us and our sons and our cattle with thirst?
Exod. And Moses cried to Jehovah, saying, What shall I do to this people? They are almost ready to stone me.
Exod. And Jehovah said to Moses, Pass on before the people,  take with thee from the elders of Israel,  thy rod, with which thou smote the river, take in thy hand,  go.
Exod. Behold, I will stand before thee there upon the rock in Horeb,  thou shall smite the rock,  there shall come water out of it, that the people may drink. And Moses did so in the sight of the elders of Israel.
Exod. And he called the name of the place Massah and Meribah, because of the contending of the sons of Israel,  because they challenged Jehovah, saying, Is Jehovah among us, or not?
Exod. Then Amalek came,  fought with Israel in Rephidim.
Exod. And Moses said to Joshua, Choose us out men,  go out, fight with Amalek. Tomorrow I will stand on the top of the hill with the rod of God in my hand.
Exod. So Joshua did as Moses had said to him,  fought with Amalek. And Moses, Aaron,  Hur went up to the top of the hill.
Exod. And it came to pass, when Moses held up his hand, that Israel prevailed,  when he let down his hand, Amalek prevailed.
Exod. But Moses' hands were heavy. And they took a stone,  put it under him,  he sat on it. and Aaron and Hur held up his hands, the one on the one side,  the other on the other side. And his hands were steady until the going down of the sun.
Exod. And Joshua weakened Amalek and his people with the edge of the sword.
Exod. And Jehovah said to Moses, Write this for a memorial in a book,  rehearse it in the ears of Joshua: that I will utterly blot out the remembrance of Amalek from under heaven.
Exod. And Moses built an altar,  called the name of it Jehovah-nissi.
Exod. And he said, Jehovah has sworn, Jehovah will have war with Amalek from generation to generation.
Exod. Now Jethro, the priest of Midian, Moses' father-in-law, heard of all that God had done for Moses,  for Israel his people, how that Jehovah had brought Israel out of Egypt.
Exod. And Jethro, Moses' father-in-law, took Zipporah, Moses' wife, after he had sent her away,
Exod. and her two sons, of whom the name of the one was Gershom, for he said, I have been a sojourner in a foreign land.
Exod. And the name of the other was Eliezer, for he said, The God of my father was my help,  delivered me from the sword of Pharaoh.
Exod. And Jethro, Moses' father-in-law, came with his sons and his wife to Moses into the wilderness where he was encamped, at the mount of God.
Exod. And he said to Moses, I, thy father-in-law Jethro, have come to thee,  thy wife,  her two sons with her.
Exod. And Moses went out to meet his father-in-law,  did obeisance,  kissed him. And they asked each other of their welfare,  they came into the tent.
Exod. And Moses told his father-in-law all that Jehovah had done to Pharaoh and to the Egyptians for Israel's sake, all the travail that had come upon them by the way,  how Jehovah delivered them.
Exod. And Jethro rejoiced for all the goodness which Jehovah had done to Israel, in that he had delivered them out of the hand of the Egyptians.
Exod. And Jethro said, Blessed be Jehovah, who has delivered you out of the hand of the Egyptians,  out of the hand of Pharaoh, who has delivered the people from under the hand of the Egyptians.
Exod. Now I know that Jehovah is greater than all gods, yea, in the thing wherein they dealt proudly against them.
Exod. And Jethro, Moses' father-in-law, took a burnt offering and sacrifices for God. And Aaron came,  all the elders of Israel, to eat bread with Moses' father-in-law before God.
Exod. And it came to pass on the morrow, that Moses sat to judge the people,  the people stood about Moses from the morning to the evening.
Exod. And when Moses' father-in-law saw all that he did to the people, he said, What is this thing that thou do to the people? Why do thou sit by thyself,  all the people stand about thee from morning to evening?
Exod. And Moses said to his father-in-law, Because the people come to me to inquire of God.
Exod. When they have a matter, they come to me,  I judge between a man and his neighbor. And I make them know the statutes of God,  his laws.
Exod. And Moses' father-in-law said to him, The thing that thou do is not good.
Exod. Thou will surely wear away, both thou,  this people that is with thee, for the thing is too heavy for thee. Thou are not able to perform it thyself alone.
Exod. Hearken now to my voice. I will give thee counsel,  God be with thee. Be thou for the people toward God,  bring thou the cases to God.
Exod. And thou shall teach them the statutes and the laws,  shall show them the way in which they must walk,  the work that they must do.
Exod. Moreover thou shall provide out of all the people able men, such as fear God, men of truth, hating unjust gain,  place such over them, to be rulers of thousands, rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties,  rulers of tens,
Exod. and let them judge the people at all seasons. And it shall be, that every great matter they shall bring to thee,  every small matter they shall judge themselves. So shall it be easier for thyself,  they shall bear the burden with thee.
Exod. If thou shall do this thing,  God command thee so, then thou shall be able to endure,  all this people also shall go to their place in peace.
Exod. So Moses hearkened to the voice of his father-in-law,  did all that he had said.
Exod. And Moses chose able men out of all Israel,  made them heads over the people, rulers of thousands, rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties,  rulers of tens,
Exod. and they judged the people at all seasons. The hard cases they brought to Moses,  every small matter they judged themselves.
Exod. And Moses let his father-in-law depart,  he went his way into his own land.
Exod. In the third month after the sons of Israel were gone forth out of the land of Egypt, the same day they came into the wilderness of Sinai.
Exod. And when they were departed from Rephidim,  came to the wilderness of Sinai, they encamped in the wilderness,  there Israel encamped before the mount.
Exod. And Moses went up to God. And Jehovah called to him out of the mountain, saying, Thus thou shall say to the house of Jacob,  tell the sons of Israel:
Exod. Ye have seen what I did to the Egyptians,  how I bore you on eagles' wings,  brought you to myself.
Exod. Now therefore, if ye will obey my voice indeed,  keep my covenant, then ye shall be my own possession from among all peoples, for all the earth is mine,
Exod. and ye shall be to me a kingdom of priests,  a holy nation. These are the words which thou shall speak to the sons of Israel.
Exod. And Moses came and called for the elders of the people,  set before them all these words which Jehovah commanded him.
Exod. And all the people answered together,  said, All that Jehovah has spoken we will do. And Moses reported the words of the people to Jehovah.
Exod. And Jehovah said to Moses, Lo, I come to thee in a thick cloud, that the people may hear when I speak with thee,  may also believe thee forever. And Moses told the words of the people to Jehovah.
Exod. And Jehovah said to Moses, Go to the people,  sanctify them today and tomorrow,  let them wash their garments,
Exod. and be ready for the third day, for the third day Jehovah will come down in the sight of all the people upon mount Sinai.
Exod. And thou shall set bounds to the people round about, saying, Take heed to yourselves, that ye not go up onto the mount, or touch the border of it. Whoever touches the mount shall be surely put to death;
Exod. no hand shall touch him,  he shall surely be stoned, or shot through, whether it be beast or man, he shall not live. When the trumpet sounds long, they shall come up to the mount.
Exod. And Moses went down from the mount to the people,  sanctified the people,  they washed their garments.
Exod. And he said to the people, Be ready for the third day. Come not near a woman.
Exod. And it came to pass on the third day, when it was morning, that there were thunders and lightnings,  a thick cloud upon the mount,  the voice of an exceedingly loud trumpet. And all the people who were in the camp trembled.
Exod. And Moses brought forth the people out of the camp to meet God,  they stood at the lower part of the mount.
Exod. And mount Sinai, the whole of it, smoked, because Jehovah descended upon it in fire,  the smoke of it ascended as the smoke of a furnace. And the whole mount quaked greatly.
Exod. And when the voice of the trumpet grew louder and louder, Moses spoke,  God answered him by a voice.
Exod. And Jehovah came down upon mount Sinai, to the top of the mount. And Jehovah called Moses to the top of the mount,  Moses went up.
Exod. And Jehovah said to Moses, Go down, command the people, lest they break through to Jehovah to gaze,  many of them perish.
Exod. And let the priests also, who come near to Jehovah, sanctify themselves, lest Jehovah break forth upon them.
Exod. And Moses said to Jehovah, The people cannot come up to mount Sinai, for thou commanded us, saying, Set bounds about the mount,  sanctify it.
Exod. And Jehovah said to him, Go, get thee down. And thou shall come up, thou,  Aaron with thee,  do not let the priests and the people break through to come up to Jehovah, lest he break forth upon them.
Exod. So Moses went down to the people,  told them.
Exod. And God spoke all these words, saying,
Exod. I am Jehovah thy God, who brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.
Exod. Thou shall have no other gods before me.
Exod. Thou shall not make to thee a graven image, nor any likeness of anything that is in heaven above, or that is on the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth.
Exod. Thou shall not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them, for I, Jehovah thy God, am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the sons, upon the third and upon the fourth generation of those who hate me,
Exod. and showing loving kindness to thousands of those who love me and keep my commandments.
Exod. Thou shall not take the name of Jehovah thy God in vain, for Jehovah will not hold him guiltless who takes his name in vain.
Exod. Remember the sabbath day, to keep it holy.
Exod. Six days thou shall labor,  do all thy work,
Exod. but the seventh day is a sabbath to Jehovah thy God. Thou shall not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy man-servant, nor thy maid-servant, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates,
Exod. for in six days Jehovah made heaven and earth, the sea,  all that is in them,  rested the seventh day. Therefore Jehovah blessed the sabbath day,  hallowed it.
Exod. Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the land which Jehovah thy God gives thee.
Exod. Thou shall not murder.
Exod. Thou shall not commit adultery.
Exod. Thou shall not steal.
Exod. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.
Exod. Thou shall not covet thy neighbor's house. Thou shall not covet thy neighbor's wife, nor his man-servant, nor his maid-servant, nor his ox, nor his donkey, nor anything that is thy neighbor's.
Exod. And all the people perceived the thunderings,  the lightnings,  the voice of the trumpet,  the mountain smoking. And when the people saw it, they trembled,  stood afar off.
Exod. And they said to Moses, Speak thou with us,  we will hear,  let not God speak with us, lest we die.
Exod. And Moses said to the people, Fear not, for God has come to prove you,  that his fear may be before you, that ye not sin.
Exod. And the people stood afar off,  Moses drew near to the thick darkness where God was.
Exod. And Jehovah said to Moses, Thus thou shall say to the sons of Israel, Ye yourselves have seen that I have talked with you from heaven.
Exod. Ye shall not make other gods with me; gods of silver, or gods of gold, ye shall not make to you.
Exod. An altar of earth thou shall make to me,  shall sacrifice on it thy burnt offerings,  thy peace offerings, thy sheep,  thine oxen. In every place where I record my name I will come to thee and I will bless thee.
Exod. And if thou make to me an altar of stone, thou shall not build it of hewn stones, for if thou lift up thy tool upon it, thou have polluted it.
Exod. Neither shall thou go up by steps to my altar, that thy nakedness be not uncovered on it.
Exod. Now these are the ordinances which thou shall set before them.
Exod. If thou buy a Hebrew servant, six years he shall serve,  in the seventh he shall go out free for nothing.
Exod. If he comes in by himself, he shall go out by himself. If he be married, then his wife shall go out with him.
Exod. If his master gives him a wife and she bears him sons or daughters, the wife and her sons shall be her master's,  he shall go out by himself.
Exod. But if the servant shall plainly say, I love my master, my wife,  my sons, I will not go out free,
Exod. then his master shall bring him to God,  shall bring him to the door, or to the door-post,  his master shall bore his ear through with an awl,  he shall serve him forever.
Exod. And if a man sells his daughter to be a maid-servant, she shall not go out as the men-servants do.
Exod. If she does not please her master, who has espoused her to himself, then he shall let her be redeemed. He shall have no power to sell her to a foreign people, since he has dealt deceitfully with her.
Exod. And if he espouses her to his son, he shall deal with her according to the manner of daughters.
Exod. If he takes him another wife, her food, her raiment,  her duty of marriage, he shall not diminish.
Exod. And if he does not do these three things to her, then she shall go out for nothing, without money.
Exod. He who smites a man, so that he dies, shall surely be put to death.
Exod. And if a man does not lie in wait,  God delivers him into his hand, then I will appoint for thee a place where he shall flee.
Exod. And if a man comes presumptuously upon his neighbor, to kill him with guile, thou shall take him from my altar, that he may die.
Exod. And he who smites his father or his mother, shall surely be put to death.
Exod. And he who steals a man,  sells him, or if he be found in his hand, he shall surely be put to death.
Exod. And he who curses his father or his mother, shall surely be put to death.
Exod. And if men contend,  one smites the other with a stone, or with his fist,  he does not die,  keeps his bed,
Exod. if he rises again,  walks abroad upon his staff, then he who smote him shall be acquitted. Only he shall pay for the loss of his time,  shall cause him to be thoroughly healed.
Exod. And if a man smites his servant, or his maid, with a rod,  he dies under his hand, he shall surely be punished.
Exod. Notwithstanding, if he continues a day or two, he shall not be punished, for he is his money.
Exod. And if men strive together,  hurt a woman with child, so that her fruit depart,  yet no harm follow, he shall be surely fined, according as the woman's husband shall lay upon him,  he shall pay as the judges determine.
Exod. But if any harm follows, then thou shall give life for life,
Exod. eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot,
Exod. burning for burning, wound for wound, stripe for stripe.
Exod. And if a man smites the eye of his servant, or the eye of his maid,  destroys it, he shall let him go free for his eye's sake.
Exod. And if he knocks out his man-servant's tooth, or his maid-servant's tooth, he shall let him go free for his tooth's sake.
Exod. And if an ox gores a man or a woman to death, the ox shall surely be stoned,  its flesh shall not be eaten,  the owner of the ox shall be acquitted.
Exod. But if the ox was accustomed to gore in time past,  it has been testified to its owner,  he has not kept it in,  it has killed a man or a woman, the ox shall be stoned,  its owner shall also be put to death.
Exod. If a ransom is laid on him, then he shall give for the redemption of his life whatever is laid upon him.
Exod. Whether it has gored a son, or has gored a daughter, according to this judgment it shall be done to him.
Exod. If the ox gores a man-servant or a maid-servant, there shall be given to their master thirty shekels of silver,  the ox shall be stoned.
Exod. And if a man shall open a pit, or if a man shall dig a pit and not cover it,  an ox or a donkey falls in it,
Exod. the owner of the pit shall make it good; he shall give money to the owner of it,  the dead beast shall be his.
Exod. And if one man's ox hurts another's, so that it dies, then they shall sell the live ox,  divide the price of it,  the dead they shall also divide.
Exod. Or if it be known that the ox was accustomed to gore in time past,  its owner has not kept it in, he shall surely pay ox for ox,  the dead beast shall be his own.
Exod. If a man shall steal an ox, or a sheep,  kill it, or sell it, he shall pay five oxen for an ox,  four sheep for a sheep.
Exod. If the thief is found breaking in,  be smitten so that he dies, there shall be no bloodguiltiness for him.
Exod. If the sun be risen upon him, there shall be bloodguiltiness for him. A thief shall make restitution. If he has nothing, then he shall be sold for his theft.
Exod. If the theft is found in his hand alive, whether it be ox, or donkey, or sheep, he shall pay double.
Exod. If a man shall cause a field or vineyard to be eaten,  shall let his beast loose,  it feeds in another man's field, he shall make restitution of the best of his own field,  of the best of his own vineyard.
Exod. If fire breaks out,  catches in thorns, so that the shocks of grain, or the standing grain, or the field are consumed, he who kindled the fire shall surely make restitution.
Exod. If a man shall deliver to his neighbor money or stuff to keep,  it be stolen out of the man's house, if the thief be found, he shall pay double.
Exod. If the thief is not found, then the master of the house shall come near to God, to see whether he has not put his hand to his neighbor's goods.
Exod. For every matter of trespass, whether it be for ox, for donkey, for sheep, for raiment, or for any manner of lost thing, of which a man says, This is it, the case of both parties shall come before God. He whom God shall condemn shall pay double to his neighbor.
Exod. If a man delivers to his neighbor a donkey, or an ox, or a sheep, or any beast, to keep,  it dies, or be hurt, or driven away, no man seeing it,
Exod. the oath of Jehovah shall be between them both, whether he has not put his hand to his neighbor's goods. And the owner of it shall accept it,  he shall not make restitution.
Exod. But if it is stolen from him, he shall make restitution to the owner of it.
Exod. If it is torn in pieces, let him bring it for evidence. He shall not make good that which was torn.
Exod. And if a man borrows anything of his neighbor,  it be hurt, or die, the owner of it not being with it, he shall surely make restitution.
Exod. If the owner of it is with it, he shall not make it good. If it be a hired thing, it came for its hire.
Exod. And if a man entices a virgin who is not betrothed,  lies with her, he shall surely pay a dowry for her to be his wife.
Exod. If her father utterly refuses to give her to him, he shall pay money according to the dowry of virgins.
Exod. Thou shall not allow a sorceress to live.
Exod. Whoever lies with a beast shall surely be put to death.
Exod. He who sacrifices to any god, except to Jehovah only, shall be utterly destroyed.
Exod. And thou shall not wrong a sojourner, neither shall thou oppress him, for ye were sojourners in the land of Egypt.
Exod. Ye shall not afflict any widow, or fatherless child.
Exod. If thou afflict them at all,  they cry at all to me, I will surely hear their cry,
Exod. and my wrath shall grow hot,  I will kill you with the sword,  your wives shall be widows,  your sons fatherless.
Exod. If thou lend money to any of my people with thee who is poor, thou shall not be to him as a creditor, neither shall ye lay upon him interest.
Exod. If thou at all take thy neighbor's garment to pledge, thou shall restore it to him before the sun goes down,
Exod. for that is his only covering. It is his garment for his skin. How shall he sleep? And it shall come to pass, when he cries to me, that I will hear, for I am gracious.
Exod. Thou shall not revile God, nor speak ill of a ruler of thy people.
Exod. Thou shall not delay to offer from thy harvest,  from the outflow of thy presses. The firstborn of thy sons thou shall give to me.
Exod. Likewise thou shall do with thine oxen,  with thy sheep. Seven days it shall be with its dam. On the eighth day thou shall give it me.
Exod. And ye shall be holy men to me. Therefore ye shall not eat any flesh that is torn of beasts in the field. Ye shall cast it to the dogs.
Exod. Thou shall not take up a false report. Do not put thy hand with the wicked man to be an unrighteous witness.
Exod. Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil, neither shall thou speak in a case to turn aside after a multitude to distort justice,
Exod. neither shall thou favor a poor man in his case.
Exod. If thou meet thine enemy's ox or his donkey going astray, thou shall surely bring it back to him again.
Exod. If thou see the donkey of him who hates thee lying under his burden, thou shall refrain leaving him. Thou shall surely release it with him.
Exod. Thou shall not distort the justice due to thy poor in his case.
Exod. Keep thee far from a false matter. And do not kill an innocent and righteous man, for I will not justify a wicked man.
Exod. And thou shall take no bribe, for a bribe blinds those who have sight,  perverts the words of the righteous.
Exod. And thou shall not oppress a sojourner, for ye know the heart of a sojourner, since ye were sojourners in the land of Egypt.
Exod. And six years thou shall sow thy land,  shall gather in the increase of it,
Exod. but the seventh year thou shall let it rest and lie fallow, that the poor of thy people may eat,  what they leave the beast of the field shall eat. In like manner thou shall deal with thy vineyard,  with thy oliveyard.
Exod. Six days thou shall do thy work,  on the seventh day thou shall rest, that thine ox and thy donkey may have rest,  the son of thy handmaid,  the sojourner, may be refreshed.
Exod. And in all things that I have said to you take ye heed,  make no mention of the name of other gods, neither let it be heard out of thy mouth.
Exod. Three times thou shall keep a feast to me in the year.
Exod. Thou shall keep the feast of unleavened bread (Seven days thou shall eat unleavened bread, as I commanded thee, at the time appointed in the month Abib, for in it thou came out from Egypt,  none shall appear before me empty),
Exod. and the feast of harvest, the first-fruits of thy labors, which thou sow in the field,  the feast of ingathering at the end of the year, when thou gather in thy labors out of the field.
Exod. Three times in the year all thy males shall appear before the lord Jehovah.
Exod. Thou shall not offer the blood of my sacrifice with leavened bread, neither shall the fat of my feast remain all night until the morning.
Exod. The first of the first-fruits of thy ground thou shall bring into the house of Jehovah thy God. Thou shall not boil a kid in its mother's milk.
Exod. Behold, I send an agent before thee, to keep thee by the way,  to bring thee into the place which I have prepared.
Exod. Take ye heed before him,  hearken to his voice, provoke him not. For he will not pardon your transgression, for my name is in him.
Exod. But if thou shall indeed hearken to his voice,  do all that I speak, then I will be an enemy to thine enemies,  an adversary to thine adversaries.
Exod. For my agent shall go before thee,  bring thee in to the Amorite,  the Hittite,  the Perizzite,  the Canaanite, the Hivite,  the Jebusite,  I will cut them off.
Exod. Thou shall not bow down to their gods, nor serve them, nor do after their works,  thou shall utterly overthrow them,  break their pillars in pieces.
Exod. And ye shall serve Jehovah your God,  he will bless thy bread,  thy water,  I will take sickness away from the midst of thee.
Exod. There shall none cast her young, nor be barren, in thy land; I will fulfill the number of thy days.
Exod. I will send my terror before thee,  will destroy all the people to whom thou shall come,  I will make all thine enemies turn their backs to thee.
Exod. And I will send the hornet before thee, which shall drive out the Hivite, the Canaanite,  the Hittite, from before thee.
Exod. I will not drive them out from before thee in one year, lest the land become desolate,  the beasts of the field multiply against thee.
Exod. Little by little I will drive them out from before thee, until thou be increased,  inherit the land.
Exod. And I will set thy border from the Red Sea even to the sea of the Philistines,  from the wilderness to the River. For I will deliver the inhabitants of the land into your hand,  thou shall drive them out before thee.
Exod. Thou shall make no covenant with them, nor with their gods.
Exod. They shall not dwell in thy land, lest they make thee sin against me, for if thou serve their gods, it will surely be a snare to thee.
Exod. And he said to Moses, Come up to Jehovah, thou,  Aaron, Nadab,  Abihu,  seventy of the elders of Israel,  worship ye afar off.
Exod. And Moses alone shall come near to Jehovah,  they shall not come near, neither shall the people go up with him.
Exod. And Moses came and told the people all the words of Jehovah,  all the ordinances. And all the people answered with one voice,  said, All the words which Jehovah has spoken will we do.
Exod. And Moses wrote all the words of Jehovah,  rose up early in the morning,  built an altar below the mount,  twelve pillars, according to the twelve tribes of Israel.
Exod. And he sent young men of the sons of Israel, who offered burnt offerings,  sacrificed peace offerings of oxen to Jehovah.
Exod. And Moses took half of the blood,  put it in basins,  half of the blood he sprinkled on the altar.
Exod. And he took the book of the covenant,  read in the audience of the people. And they said, All that Jehovah has spoken will we do,  be obedient.
Exod. And Moses took the blood,  sprinkled it on the people,  said, Behold the blood of the covenant that Jehovah has made with you concerning all these words.
Exod. Then Moses,  Aaron, Nadab,  Abihu,  seventy of the elders of Israel went up.
Exod. And they saw the God of Israel. And there was under his feet as it were a paved work of sapphire stone,  as it were the very heaven for clearness.
Exod. And he laid not his hand upon the nobles of the sons of Israel. And they beheld God,  ate and drank.
Exod. And Jehovah said to Moses, Come up to me onto the mount,  be there,  I will give thee the tablets of stone,  the law and the commandment, which I have written, that thou may teach them.
Exod. And Moses rose up,  Joshua his minister,  Moses went up onto the mount of God.
Exod. And he said to the elders, Tarry ye here for us, until we come again to you. And, behold, Aaron and Hur are with you; whoever has a case, let him come near to them.
Exod. And Moses went up onto the mount,  the cloud covered the mount.
Exod. And the glory of Jehovah abode upon mount Sinai,  the cloud covered it six days. And the seventh day he called to Moses out of the midst of the cloud.
Exod. And the appearance of the glory of Jehovah was like devouring fire on the top of the mount in the eyes of the sons of Israel.
Exod. And Moses entered into the midst of the cloud,  went up onto the mount. And Moses was on the mount forty days and forty nights.
Exod. And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Exod. Speak to the sons of Israel, that they take for me an offering; of every man whose heart makes him willing ye shall take my offering.
Exod. And this is the offering which ye shall take of them: gold,  silver,  brass,
Exod. and blue,  purple,  scarlet,  fine linen,  goats' hair,
Exod. and rams' skins dyed red,  certain skins,  acacia wood,
Exod. oil for the light, spices for the anointing oil and for the sweet incense,
Exod. onyx stones,  stones to be set for the ephod and for the breastplate.
Exod. And let them make me a sanctuary, that I may dwell among them.
Exod. According to all that I show thee: the pattern of the tabernacle,  the pattern of all the furniture of it, even so shall ye make it.
Exod. And they shall make an ark of acacia wood. Two cubits and a half shall be the length of it,  a cubit and a half the breadth of it,  a cubit and a half the height of it.
Exod. And thou shall overlay it with pure gold. Inside and outside thou shall overlay it,  shall make upon it a crown of gold round about.
Exod. And thou shall cast four rings of gold for it,  put them in the four feet of it. And two rings shall be on the one side of it,  two rings on the other side of it.
Exod. And thou shall make staves of acacia wood,  overlay them with gold.
Exod. And thou shall put the staves into the rings on the sides of the ark, with which to bear the ark.
Exod. The staves shall be in the rings of the ark; they shall not be taken from it.
Exod. And thou shall put into the ark the testimony which I shall give thee.
Exod. And thou shall make a mercy-seat of pure gold: two cubits and a half the length of it,  a cubit and a half the breadth of it.
Exod. And thou shall make two cherubim of gold; of beaten work shall thou make them, at the two ends of the mercy-seat.
Exod. And make one cherub at the one end,  one cherub at the other end; of one piece with the mercy-seat ye shall make the cherubim on the two ends of it.
Exod. And the cherubim shall spread out their wings on high, covering the mercy-seat with their wings, with their faces one to another; the faces of the cherubim shall be toward the mercy-seat.
Exod. And thou shall put the mercy-seat above upon the ark. And in the ark thou shall put the testimony that I shall give thee.
Exod. And there I will meet with thee. And I will commune with thee from above the mercy-seat, from between the two cherubim which are upon the ark of the testimony, of all things which I will give thee in commandment to the sons of Israel.
Exod. And thou shall make a table of acacia wood, two cubits the length of it,  a cubit the breadth of it,  a cubit and a half the height of it.
Exod. And thou shall overlay it with pure gold,  make thereto a crown of gold round about.
Exod. And thou shall make to it a border of a handbreadth round about,  thou shall make a golden crown to the border of it round about.
Exod. And thou shall make for it four rings of gold,  put the rings in the four corners that are on the four feet of it.
Exod. The rings shall be close by the border, for places for the staves to bear the table.
Exod. And thou shall make the staves of acacia wood,  overlay them with gold, that the table may be borne with them.
Exod. And thou shall make the dishes of it,  the spoons of it,  the pitchers of it,  the bowls of it, with which to pour out, of pure gold thou shall make them.
Exod. And thou shall set upon the table showbread before me always.
Exod. And thou shall make a lampstand of pure gold. Of beaten work shall the lampstand be made, even its base,  its shaft, its cups, its knobs,  its flowers, shall be of one piece with it.
Exod. And there shall be six branches going out of the sides of it, three branches of the lampstand out of the one side of it,  three branches of the lampstand out of the other side of it:
Exod. three cups made like almond-blossoms in one branch, a knob and a flower,  three cups made like almond-blossoms in the other branch, a knob and a flower, so for the six branches going out of the lampstand,
Exod. and in the lampstand four cups made like almond-blossoms, the knobs of it,  the flowers of it.
Exod. And a knob under two branches of one piece with it,  a knob under two branches of one piece with it,  a knob under two branches of one piece with it, for the six branches going out of the lampstand.
Exod. Their knobs and their branches shall be of one piece with it, the whole of it one beaten work of pure gold.
Exod. And thou shall make the lamps of it, seven. And they shall light the lamps of it, to give light in front of it.
Exod. And the snuffers of it,  the snuff dishes of it, shall be of pure gold.
Exod. Of a talent of pure gold shall it be made, with all these vessels.
Exod. And see that thou make them according to their pattern that has been shown thee on the mountain.
Exod. Moreover thou shall make the tabernacle with ten curtains, of fine twined linen,  blue,  purple,  scarlet, with cherubim the work of the skilful workman shall thou make them.
Exod. The length of each curtain shall be twenty-eight cubits,  the breadth of each curtain four cubits. All the curtains shall have one measure.
Exod. Five curtains shall be coupled together one to another,  the other five curtains shall be coupled one to another.
Exod. And thou shall make loops of blue upon the edge of the one curtain from the selvedge in the coupling,  likewise thou shall make in the edge of the curtain that is outmost in the second coupling.
Exod. Fifty loops thou shall make in the one curtain,  fifty loops thou shall make in the edge of the curtain that is in the second coupling; the loops shall be opposite one to another.
Exod. And thou shall make fifty clasps of gold,  couple the curtains one to another with the clasps. And the tabernacle shall be one whole.
Exod. And thou shall make curtains of goats' hair for a tent over the tabernacle. Eleven curtains thou shall make them.
Exod. The length of each curtain shall be thirty cubits,  the breadth of each curtain four cubits. The eleven curtains shall have one measure.
Exod. And thou shall couple five curtains by themselves,  six curtains by themselves,  shall double over the sixth curtain in the forefront of the tent.
Exod. And thou shall make fifty loops on the edge of the one curtain that is outmost in the coupling,  fifty loops upon the edge of the curtain which is outmost in the second coupling.
Exod. And thou shall make fifty clasps of brass,  put the clasps into the loops,  couple the tent together, that it may be one.
Exod. And the overhanging part that remains of the curtains of the tent, the half curtain that remains, shall hang over the back of the tabernacle.
Exod. And the cubit on the one side,  the cubit on the other side, of that which remains in the length of the curtains of the tent, shall hang over the sides of the tabernacle on this side and on that side, to cover it.
Exod. And thou shall make a covering for the tent of rams' skins dyed red,  a covering of certain skins above.
Exod. And thou shall make the boards for the tabernacle of acacia wood, standing up.
Exod. Ten cubits shall be the length of a board,  a cubit and a half the breadth of each board.
Exod. There shall be two tenons in each board, joined one to another. Thus thou shall make for all the boards of the tabernacle.
Exod. And thou shall make the boards for the tabernacle, twenty boards for the south side southward.
Exod. And thou shall make forty sockets of silver under the twenty boards: two sockets under one board for its two tenons,  two sockets under another board for its two tenons.
Exod. And for the second side of the tabernacle, on the north side, twenty boards,
Exod. and their forty sockets of silver: two sockets under one board,  two sockets under another board.
Exod. And for the hinder part of the tabernacle westward thou shall make six boards.
Exod. And thou shall make two boards for the corners of the tabernacle in the hinder part.
Exod. And they shall be double beneath,  in like manner they shall be entire to the top of it to one ring. Thus shall it be for them both, they shall be for the two corners.
Exod. And there shall be eight boards,  their sockets of silver, sixteen sockets: two sockets under one board,  two sockets under another board.
Exod. And thou shall make bars of acacia wood: five for the boards of the one side of the tabernacle,
Exod. and five bars for the boards of the other side of the tabernacle,  five bars for the boards of the side of the tabernacle, for the hinder part westward.
Exod. And the middle bar in the midst of the boards shall pass through from end to end.
Exod. And thou shall overlay the boards with gold,  make their rings of gold for places for the bars. And thou shall overlay the bars with gold.
Exod. And thou shall raise up the tabernacle according to the fashion of it which has been shown thee on the mount.
Exod. And thou shall make a veil of blue,  purple,  scarlet,  fine twined linen. With cherubim the work of the skilful workman shall it be made.
Exod. And thou shall hang it upon four pillars of acacia overlaid with gold, their hooks shall be of gold, upon four sockets of silver.
Exod. And thou shall hang up the veil under the clasps,  shall bring in there within the veil the ark of the testimony. And the veil shall separate to you between the holy place and the most holy.
Exod. And thou shall put the mercy-seat upon the ark of the testimony in the most holy place.
Exod. And thou shall set the table outside the veil,  the lampstand opposite the table on the side of the tabernacle toward the south. And thou shall put the table on the north side.
Exod. And thou shall make a screen for the door of the tent, of blue,  purple,  scarlet,  fine twined linen, the work of the embroiderer.
Exod. And thou shall make for the screen five pillars of acacia,  overlay them with gold. Their hooks shall be of gold,  thou shall cast five sockets of brass for them.
Exod. And thou shall make the altar of acacia wood, five cubits long,  five cubits broad (the altar shall be foursquare),  the height of it shall be three cubits.
Exod. And thou shall make the horns of it upon the four corners of it. The horns of it shall be of one piece with it,  thou shall overlay it with brass.
Exod. And thou shall make its pots to take away its ashes,  its shovels,  its basins,  its flesh-hooks,  its firepans; all the vessels of it thou shall make of brass.
Exod. And thou shall make for it a grating of network of brass,  upon the network thou shall make four brazen rings in the four corners of it.
Exod. And thou shall put it under the ledge round the altar beneath, that the network may reach halfway up the altar.
Exod. And thou shall make staves for the altar, staves of acacia wood,  overlay them with brass.
Exod. And the staves of it shall be put into the rings,  the staves shall be upon the two sides of the altar, in bearing it.
Exod. Thou shall make it hollow with planks. As it has been shown thee on the mount, so shall they make it.
Exod. And thou shall make the court of the tabernacle. For the south side southward there shall be hangings for the court of fine twined linen a hundred cubits long for one side.
Exod. And the pillars of it shall be twenty,  their sockets twenty, of brass. The hooks of the pillars and their bands shall be of silver.
Exod. And likewise for the north side in length there shall be hangings a hundred cubits long,  the pillars of it twenty,  their sockets twenty, of brass, the hooks of the pillars and their bands, of silver.
Exod. And for the breadth of the court on the west side shall be hangings of fifty cubits, their pillars ten,  their sockets ten.
Exod. And the breadth of the court on the east side eastward shall be fifty cubits.
Exod. The hangings for the one side of the gate shall be fifteen cubits, their pillars three,  their sockets three.
Exod. And for the other side shall be hangings of fifteen cubits, their pillars three,  their sockets three.
Exod. And for the gate of the court shall be a screen of twenty cubits, of blue,  purple,  scarlet,  fine twined linen, the work of the embroiderer, their pillars four,  their sockets four.
Exod. All the pillars of the court round about shall be banded with silver, their hooks of silver,  their sockets of brass.
Exod. The length of the court shall be a hundred cubits,  the breadth fifty everywhere,  the height five cubits, of fine twined linen,  their sockets of brass.
Exod. All the instruments of the tabernacle in all the service of it,  all the pegs of it,  all the pegs of the court, shall be of brass.
Exod. And thou shall command the sons of Israel, that they bring to thee pure beaten olive oil for the light, to cause a lamp to burn continually
Exod. in the tent of meeting, outside the veil which is before the testimony. Aaron and his sons shall keep it in order from evening to morning before Jehovah. It shall be a statute forever throughout their generations on the behalf of the sons of Israel.
Exod. And bring thou near to thee Aaron thy brother,  his sons with him, from among the sons of Israel, that he may minister to me in the priest's office, even Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar, Aaron's sons.
Exod. And thou shall make holy garments for Aaron thy brother, for glory and for beauty.
Exod. And thou shall speak to all who are wise-hearted, whom I have filled with the spirit of wisdom, that they make Aaron's garments to sanctify him, that he may minister to me in the priest's office.
Exod. And these are the garments which they shall make: a breastplate,  an ephod,  a robe,  a tunic of checker work, a miter,  a sash. And they shall make holy garments for Aaron thy brother,  his sons, that he may minister to me in the priest's office.
Exod. And they shall take the gold,  the blue,  the purple,  the scarlet,  the fine linen.
Exod. And they shall make the ephod of gold, of blue,  purple, scarlet,  fine twined linen, the work of the skilful workman.
Exod. It shall have two shoulder-pieces joined to the two ends of it, that it may be joined together.
Exod. And the skillfully woven band, which is upon it, with which to gird it on, shall be like the work of it and of the same piece, of gold, of blue,  purple,  scarlet,  fine twined linen.
Exod. And thou shall take two onyx stones,  engrave on them the names of the sons of Israel:
Exod. six of their names on the one stone,  the names of the six that remain on the other stone, according to their birth.
Exod. With the work of an engraver in stone, like the engravings of a signet, thou shall engrave the two stones, according to the names of the sons of Israel. Thou shall make them to be enclosed in settings of gold.
Exod. And thou shall put the two stones upon the shoulder-pieces of the ephod, to be stones of memorial for the sons of Israel. And Aaron shall bear their names before Jehovah upon his two shoulders for a memorial.
Exod. And thou shall make settings of gold,
Exod. and two chains of pure gold, like cords shall thou make them, of wreathen work. And thou shall put the wreathen chains on the settings.
Exod. And thou shall make a breastplate of judgment, the work of the skilful workman. Thou shall make it like the work of the ephod: of gold, of blue,  purple,  scarlet,  fine twined linen, thou shall make it.
Exod. It shall be foursquare and double, a span shall be the length of it,  a span the breadth of it.
Exod. And thou shall set in it settings of stones, four rows of stones: a row of sardius, topaz,  carbuncle shall be the first row,
Exod. and the second row an emerald, a sapphire,  a diamond,
Exod. and the third row a jacinth, an agate,  an amethyst,
Exod. and the fourth row a beryl,  an onyx,  a jasper. They shall be enclosed in gold in their settings.
Exod. And the stones shall be according to the names of the sons of Israel, twelve, according to their names, like the engravings of a signet, every one according to his name; they shall be for the twelve tribes.
Exod. And thou shall make upon the breastplate chains like cords, of wreathen work of pure gold.
Exod. And thou shall make upon the breastplate two rings of gold,  shall put the two rings on the two ends of the breastplate.
Exod. And thou shall put the two wreathen chains of gold in the two rings at the ends of the breastplate.
Exod. And the other two ends of the two wreathen chains thou shall put on the two settings,  put them on the shoulder-pieces of the ephod in the forepart of it.
Exod. And thou shall make two rings of gold,  thou shall put them upon the two ends of the breastplate, upon the edge of it, which is toward the side of the ephod inward.
Exod. And thou shall make two rings of gold,  shall put them on the two shoulder-pieces of the ephod underneath, in the forepart of it, close by the coupling of it, above the skillfully woven band of the ephod.
Exod. And they shall bind the breastplate by the rings of it to the rings of the ephod with a lace of blue, that it may be upon the skillfully woven band of the ephod,  that the breastplate be not loosed from the ephod.
Exod. And Aaron shall bear the names of the sons of Israel in the breastplate of judgment upon his heart, when he goes in to the holy place, for a memorial before Jehovah continually.
Exod. And thou shall put in the breastplate of judgment the Urim and the Thummim,  they shall be upon Aaron's heart, when he goes in before Jehovah. And Aaron shall bear the judgment of the sons of Israel upon his heart before Jehovah continually.
Exod. And thou shall make the robe of the ephod all of blue.
Exod. And it shall have a hole for the head in the midst of it. It shall have a binding of woven work round about the hole of it, as it were the hole of a coat of mail, that it be not torn.
Exod. And upon the skirts of it thou shall make pomegranates of blue,  of purple,  of scarlet, round about the skirts of it,  bells of gold between them round about:
Exod. a golden bell and a pomegranate, a golden bell and a pomegranate, upon the skirts of the robe round about.
Exod. And it shall be upon Aaron to minister. And the sound of it shall be heard when he goes in to the holy place before Jehovah,  when he comes out, that he does not die.
Exod. And thou shall make a plate of pure gold,  engrave upon it, like the engravings of a signet, HOLY TO JEHOVAH.
Exod. And thou shall put it on a lace of blue,  it shall be upon the miter. It shall be upon the forefront of the miter.
Exod. And it shall be upon Aaron's forehead. And Aaron shall bear the iniquity of the holy things, which the sons of Israel shall hallow in all their holy gifts. And it shall always be upon his forehead, that they may be accepted before Jehovah.
Exod. And thou shall weave the tunic in checker work of fine linen. And thou shall make a miter of fine linen. And thou shall make a sash, the work of the embroiderer.
Exod. And for Aaron's sons thou shall make tunics. And thou shall make for them sashes,  head-coverings thou shall make for them, for glory and for beauty.
Exod. And thou shall put them upon Aaron thy brother,  upon his sons with him,  shall anoint them,  consecrate them,  sanctify them, that they may minister to me in the priest's office.
Exod. And thou shall make for them linen breeches to cover the flesh of their nakedness, from the loins even to the thighs they shall reach.
Exod. And they shall be upon Aaron,  upon his sons, when they go in to the tent of meeting, or when they come near to the altar to minister in the holy place, that they not bear iniquity,  die. It shall be a statute forever to him and to his seed after him.
Exod. And this is the thing that thou shall do to them to hallow them, to minister to me in the priest's office: Take one young bullock and two rams without blemish,
Exod. and unleavened bread,  cakes unleavened mingled with oil,  wafers unleavened anointed with oil, of fine wheaten flour shall thou make them,
Exod. and thou shall put them into one basket,  bring them in the basket, with the bullock and the two rams.
Exod. And Aaron and his sons thou shall bring to the door of the tent of meeting,  shall wash them with water.
Exod. And thou shall take the garments,  put upon Aaron the tunic,  the robe of the ephod,  the ephod,  the breastplate,  gird him with the skillfully woven band of the ephod.
Exod. And thou shall set the miter upon his head,  put the holy crown upon the miter.
Exod. Then thou shall take the anointing oil,  pour it upon his head,  anoint him.
Exod. And thou shall bring his sons,  put tunics upon them.
Exod. And thou shall gird them with sashes, Aaron and his sons,  bind head-coverings on them. And they shall have the priesthood by a perpetual statute. And thou shall consecrate Aaron and his sons.
Exod. And thou shall bring the bullock before the tent of meeting. And Aaron and his sons shall lay their hands upon the head of the bullock,
Exod. and thou shall kill the bullock before Jehovah, at the door of the tent of meeting.
Exod. And thou shall take of the blood of the bullock,  put it upon the horns of the altar with thy finger,  thou shall pour out all the blood at the base of the altar.
Exod. And thou shall take all the fat that covers the inwards,  the caul upon the liver,  the two kidneys,  the fat that is upon them,  burn them upon the altar.
Exod. But the flesh of the bullock,  its skin,  it dung, thou shall burn with fire outside the camp. It is a sin offering.
Exod. Thou shall also take the one ram,  Aaron and his sons shall lay their hands upon the head of the ram.
Exod. And thou shall slay the ram,  thou shall take its blood,  sprinkle it round about upon the altar.
Exod. And thou shall cut the ram into its pieces,  wash its inwards,  its legs,  put them with its pieces,  with its head,
Exod. and thou shall burn the whole ram upon the altar. It is a burnt offering to Jehovah. It is a sweet savor, an offering made by fire to Jehovah.
Exod. And thou shall take the other ram,  Aaron and his sons shall lay their hands upon the head of the ram.
Exod. Then thou shall kill the ram,  take of its blood,  put it upon the tip of the right ear of Aaron,  upon the tip of the right ear of his sons,  upon the thumb of their right hand,  upon the great toe of their right foot,  sprinkle the blood upon the altar round about.
Exod. And thou shall take of the blood that is upon the altar,  of the anointing oil,  sprinkle it upon Aaron,  upon his garments,  upon his sons,  upon the garments of his sons with him. And he shall be hallowed,  his garments,  his sons,  his sons' garments with him.
Exod. Also thou shall take from the ram the fat,  the fat tail,  the fat that covers the inwards,  the caul of the liver,  the two kidneys,  the fat that is upon them,  the right thigh (for it is a ram of consecration),
Exod. and one loaf of bread,  one cake of oiled bread,  one wafer, out of the basket of unleavened bread that is before Jehovah,
Exod. and thou shall put the whole upon the hands of Aaron,  upon the hands of his sons,  shall wave them for a wave offering before Jehovah.
Exod. And thou shall take them from their hands,  burn them on the altar upon the burnt offering, for a sweet savor before Jehovah. It is an offering made by fire to Jehovah.
Exod. And thou shall take the breast of Aaron's ram of consecration,  wave it for a wave offering before Jehovah,  it shall be thy portion.
Exod. And thou shall sanctify the breast of the wave offering,  the thigh of the heave offering, which is waved,  which is heaved up, of the ram of consecration, even of that which is for Aaron,  of that which is for his sons,
Exod. and it shall be for Aaron and his sons as their portion forever from the sons of Israel, for it is a heave offering. And it shall be a heave offering from the sons of Israel of the sacrifices of their peace offerings, even their heave offering to Jehovah.
Exod. And the holy garments of Aaron shall be for his sons after him, to be anointed in them,  to be consecrated in them.
Exod. Seven days shall the son that is priest in his stead put them on, when he comes into the tent of meeting to minister in the holy place.
Exod. And thou shall take the ram of consecration,  boil its flesh in a holy place.
Exod. And Aaron and his sons shall eat the flesh of the ram,  the bread that is in the basket, at the door of the tent of meeting.
Exod. And they shall eat those things with which atonement was made, to consecrate and to sanctify them,  a stranger shall not eat of it, because they are holy.
Exod. And if any of the flesh of the consecration, or of the bread, remains to the morning, then thou shall burn the remainder with fire. It shall not be eaten, because it is holy.
Exod. And thus thou shall do to Aaron,  to his sons, according to all that I have commanded thee. Seven days thou shall consecrate them.
Exod. And every day thou shall offer the bullock of sin offering for atonement. And thou shall cleanse the altar when thou make atonement for it,  thou shall anoint it, to sanctify it.
Exod. Seven days thou shall make atonement for the altar,  sanctify it. And the altar shall be most holy. Whatever touches the altar shall be holy.
Exod. Now this is that which thou shall offer upon the altar: two lambs a year old day by day continually.
Exod. The one lamb thou shall offer in the morning,  the other lamb thou shall offer at evening.
Exod. And with the one lamb a tenth part of an ephah of fine flour mingled with the fourth part of a hin of beaten oil,  the fourth part of a hin of wine for a drink offering.
Exod. And the other lamb thou shall offer at evening,  shall do thereto according to the meal offering of the morning,  according to the drink offering of it, for a sweet savor, an offering made by fire to Jehovah.
Exod. It shall be a continual burnt offering throughout your generations at the door of the tent of meeting before Jehovah, where I will meet with you, to speak to thee there.
Exod. And there I will meet with the sons of Israel,  the tent shall be sanctified by my glory.
Exod. And I will sanctify the tent of meeting,  the altar. I will also sanctify Aaron and his sons to minister to me in the priest's office.
Exod. And I will dwell among the sons of Israel,  will be their God.
Exod. And they shall know that I am Jehovah their God, who brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, that I might dwell among them. I am Jehovah their God.
Exod. And thou shall make an altar to burn incense upon. Thou shall make it of acacia wood.
Exod. A cubit shall be the length of it,  a cubit the breadth of it (it shall be foursquare),  two cubits shall be the height of it. The horns of it shall be of one piece with it.
Exod. And thou shall overlay it with pure gold, the top of it,  the sides of it round about,  the horns of it. And thou shall make to it a crown of gold round about.
Exod. And two golden rings thou shall make for it under the crown of it, upon the two ribs of it, upon the two sides of it thou shall make them. And they shall be for places for staves with which to bear it.
Exod. And thou shall make the staves of acacia wood,  overlay them with gold.
Exod. And thou shall put it before the veil that is by the ark of the testimony, before the mercy-seat that is over the testimony, where I will meet with thee.
Exod. And Aaron shall burn in it incense of sweet spices. Every morning, when he dresses the lamps, he shall burn it.
Exod. And when Aaron lights the lamps at evening, he shall burn it, a perpetual incense before Jehovah throughout your generations.
Exod. Ye shall offer no strange incense on it, nor burnt offering, nor meal offering. And ye shall pour no drink offering on it.
Exod. And Aaron shall make atonement upon the horns of it once in the year, with the blood of the sin offering of atonement. Once in the year he shall make atonement for it throughout your generations. It is most holy to Jehovah.
Exod. And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Exod. When thou take the sum of the sons of Israel, according to those who are numbered of them, then they shall give every man a ransom for his soul to Jehovah when thou number them, that there be no plague among them when thou number them.
Exod. This they shall give, everyone who passes over to those who are numbered: half a shekel after the shekel of the sanctuary, (the shekel is twenty gerahs,) half a shekel for an offering to Jehovah.
Exod. Everyone who passes over to those who are numbered, from twenty years old and upward, shall give the offering of Jehovah.
Exod. The rich shall not give more,  the poor shall not give less, than the half shekel, when they give the offering of Jehovah, to make atonement for your souls.
Exod. And thou shall take the atonement money from the sons of Israel,  shall appoint it for the service of the tent of meeting, that it may be a memorial for the sons of Israel before Jehovah, to make atonement for your souls.
Exod. And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Exod. Thou shall also make a laver of brass,  the base of it of brass for washing. And thou shall put it between the tent of meeting and the altar,  thou shall put water in it.
Exod. And Aaron and his sons shall wash their hands and their feet there.
Exod. When they go into the tent of meeting, they shall wash with water, that they not die, or when they come near to the altar to minister, to burn an offering made by fire to Jehovah.
Exod. So they shall wash their hands and their feet, that they not die. And it shall be a statute forever to them, even to him and to his seed throughout their generations.
Exod. Moreover Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Exod. Take thou also to thee the chief spices: of flowing myrrh five hundred shekels,  of sweet cinnamon half so much, even two hundred and fifty,  of sweet calamus two hundred and fifty,
Exod. and of cassia five hundred, after the shekel of the sanctuary,  of olive oil a hin.
Exod. And thou shall make it a holy anointing oil, a perfume compounded after the art of the perfumer. It shall be a holy anointing oil.
Exod. And thou shall anoint with it the tent of meeting,  the ark of the testimony,
Exod. and the table and all the vessels of it,  the lampstand and the vessels of it,  the altar of incense,
Exod. and the altar of burnt offering with all the vessels of it,  the laver and the base of it.
Exod. And thou shall sanctify them, that they may be most holy. Whatever touches them shall be holy.
Exod. And thou shall anoint Aaron and his sons,  sanctify them, that they may minister to me in the priest's office.
Exod. And thou shall speak to the sons of Israel, saying, This shall be a holy anointing oil to me throughout your generations.
Exod. Upon the flesh of man it shall not be poured, neither shall ye make any like it, according to the composition of it. It is holy,  it shall be holy to you.
Exod. Whoever compounds any like it, or whoever puts any of it upon a stranger, he shall be cut off from his people.
Exod. And Jehovah said to Moses, Take to thee sweet spices, stacte,  onycha,  galbanum, sweet spices with pure frankincense, of each shall there be a like weight.
Exod. And thou shall make of it incense, a perfume after the art of the perfumer, seasoned with salt, pure and holy.
Exod. And thou shall beat some of it very small,  put of it before the testimony in the tent of meeting, where I will meet with thee. It shall be to you most holy.
Exod. And the incense which thou shall make, ye shall not make for yourselves according to the composition of it. It shall be to thee holy for Jehovah.
Exod. Whoever shall make like that, to smell of it, he shall be cut off from his people.
Exod. And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Exod. See, I have called by name Bezalel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah,
Exod. and I have filled him with the Spirit of God, in wisdom,  in understanding,  in knowledge,  in all manner of workmanship,
Exod. to devise skilful works, to work in gold,  in silver,  in brass,
Exod. and in cutting of stones for setting,  in carving of wood, to work in all manner of workmanship.
Exod. And I, behold, I have appointed with him Oholiab, the son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan. And in the heart of all who are wise-hearted I have put wisdom, that they may make all that I have commanded thee:
Exod. the tent of meeting,  the ark of the testimony,  the mercy-seat that is on it,  all the furniture of the tent,
Exod. and the table and its vessels,  the pure lampstand with all its vessels,  the altar of incense,
Exod. and the altar of burnt offering with all its vessels,  the laver and its base,
Exod. and the finely wrought garments,  the holy garments for Aaron the priest,  the garments of his sons, to minister in the priest's office,
Exod. and the anointing oil,  the incense of sweet spices for the holy place. According to all that I have commanded thee they shall do.
Exod. And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Exod. Speak thou also to the sons of Israel, saying, Truly ye shall keep my sabbaths, for it is a sign between me and you throughout your generations, that ye may know that I am Jehovah who sanctifies you.
Exod. Ye shall keep the sabbath therefore, for it is holy to you. Everyone who profanes it shall surely be put to death, for whoever does any work on it, that soul shall be cut off from among his people.
Exod. Six days shall work be done,  on the seventh day is a sabbath of solemn rest, holy to Jehovah. Whoever does any work on the sabbath day, he shall surely be put to death.
Exod. Therefore the sons of Israel shall keep the sabbath, to observe the sabbath throughout their generations, for a perpetual covenant.
Exod. It is a sign between me and the sons of Israel forever. For in six days Jehovah made heaven and earth,  on the seventh day he rested,  was refreshed.
Exod. And he gave to Moses, when he had made an end of communing with him upon mount Sinai, the two tablets of the testimony, tablets of stone, written with the finger of God.
Exod. And when the people saw that Moses delayed to come down from the mount, the people gathered themselves together to Aaron,  said to him, Up, make gods for us, which shall go before us. For as for this Moses, the man that brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we know not what has become of him.
Exod. And Aaron said to them, Break off the golden rings, which are in the ears of your wives, of your sons,  of your daughters,  bring them to me.
Exod. And all the people broke off the golden rings which were in their ears,  brought them to Aaron.
Exod. And he received it at their hand,  fashioned it with a graving tool,  made it a molten calf. And they said, These are thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.
Exod. And when Aaron saw this, he built an altar before it. And Aaron made proclamation,  said, Tomorrow shall be a feast to Jehovah.
Exod. And they rose up early on the morrow,  offered burnt offerings,  brought peace offerings. And the people sat down to eat and to drink,  rose up to revel.
Exod. And Jehovah spoke to Moses, Go, get thee down. For thy people, that thou brought up out of the land of Egypt, have corrupted themselves.
Exod. They have turned aside quickly out of the way which I commanded them. They have made for them a molten calf,  have worshiped it,  have sacrificed to it,  said, These are thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.
Exod. And Jehovah said to Moses, I have seen this people, , behold, it is a stiff-necked people.
Exod. Now therefore let me alone, that my wrath may grow hot against them,  that I may consume them. And I will make of thee a great nation.
Exod. And Moses besought Jehovah his God,  said, Jehovah, why does thy wrath grow hot against thy people, whom thou have brought forth out of the land of Egypt with great power and with a mighty hand?
Exod. Why should the Egyptians speak, saying, He brought them forth for evil, to kill them on the mountains,  to consume them from the face of the earth? Turn from thy fierce wrath,  relent of this evil against thy people.
Exod. Remember Abraham, Isaac,  Israel, thy servants, to whom thou swore by thine own self,  said to them, I will multiply your seed as the stars of heaven. And all this land that I have spoken of I will give to your seed,  they shall inherit it forever.
Exod. And Jehovah relented of the evil which he said he would do to his people.
Exod. And Moses turned,  went down from the mount, with the two tablets of the testimony in his hand, tablets that were written on both their sides; on the one side and on the other were they written.
Exod. And the tablets were the work of God,  the writing was the writing of God, engraved upon the tablets.
Exod. And when Joshua heard the noise of the people as they shouted, he said to Moses, There is a noise of war in the camp.
Exod. And he said, It is not the voice of those who shout for mastery, neither is it the voice of those who cry for being overcome,  the noise of those who sing do I hear.
Exod. And it came to pass, as soon as he came near to the camp, that he saw the calf and the dancing. And Moses' anger grew hot,  he cast the tablets out of his hands,  broke them beneath the mount.
Exod. And he took the calf which they had made,  burnt it with fire,  ground it to powder,  scattered it upon the water,  made the sons of Israel drink of it.
Exod. And Moses said to Aaron, What did this people do to thee, that thou have brought a great sin upon them?
Exod. And Aaron said, Let not the anger of my lord grow hot. Thou know the people, that they are set on evil.
Exod. For they said to me, Make gods for us, which shall go before us. For as for this Moses, the man who brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we know not what has become of him.
Exod. And I said to them, Whoever has any gold, let them break it off. So they gave it to me,  I cast it into the fire,  there came out this calf.
Exod. And when Moses saw that the people were broken loose, (for Aaron had let them loose for a derision among their enemies,)
Exod. then Moses stood in the gate of the camp,  said, Whoever is on Jehovah's side, come to me. And all the sons of Levi gathered themselves together to him.
Exod. And he said to them, Thus says Jehovah, the God of Israel, Put ye every man his sword upon his thigh,  go to and fro from gate to gate throughout the camp,  slay every man his brother,  every man his companion,  every man his neighbor.
Exod. And the sons of Levi did according to the word of Moses. And there fell of the people that day about three thousand men.
Exod. And Moses said, Consecrate yourselves today to Jehovah, yea, every man against his son,  against his brother, that he may bestow upon you a blessing this day.
Exod. And it came to pass on the morrow, that Moses said to the people, Ye have sinned a great sin. And now I will go up to Jehovah, perhaps I shall make atonement for your sin.
Exod. And Moses returned to Jehovah,  said, Oh, this people have sinned a great sin,  have made gods of gold for them.
Exod. Yet now, if thou will forgive their sin-,  if not, blot me, I pray thee, out of thy book which thou have written.
Exod. And Jehovah said to Moses, Whoever has sinned against me, him will I blot out of my book.
Exod. And now go, lead the people to the place of which I have spoken to thee. Behold, my agent shall go before thee. Nevertheless in the day when I visit, I will visit their sin upon them.
Exod. And Jehovah smote the people, because they made the calf, which Aaron made.
Exod. And Jehovah spoke to Moses, Depart, go up from here, thou and the people that thou have brought up out of the land of Egypt, to the land of which I swore to Abraham, to Isaac,  to Jacob, saying, To thy seed will I give it.
Exod. And I will send an agent before thee,  I will drive out the Canaanite, the Amorite,  the Hittite,  the Perizzite, the Hivite,  the Jebusite-
Exod. to a land flowing with milk and honey. For I will not go up in the midst of thee, for thou are a stiff-necked people, lest I consume thee on the way.
Exod. And when the people heard these evil tidings, they mourned,  no man put his ornaments on him.
Exod. And Jehovah said to Moses, Say to the sons of Israel, Ye are a stiff-necked people. If I go up into the midst of thee for one moment, I shall consume thee. Therefore now put off thy ornaments from thee, that I may know what to do to thee.
Exod. And the sons of Israel stripped themselves of their ornaments from mount Horeb onward.
Exod. Now Moses used to take the tent and to pitch it outside the camp, afar off from the camp,  he called it, The tent of meeting. And it came to pass, that everyone who sought Jehovah went out to the tent of meeting, which was outside the camp.
Exod. And it came to pass, when Moses went out to the tent, that all the people rose up,  stood, every man at his tent door,  looked after Moses, until he was gone into the tent.
Exod. And it came to pass, when Moses entered into the tent, the pillar of cloud descended,  stood at the door of the tent,  Jehovah spoke with Moses.
Exod. And all the people saw the pillar of cloud stand at the door of the tent. And all the people rose up and worshiped, every man at his tent door.
Exod. And Jehovah spoke to Moses face to face, as a man speaks to his friend,  he turned again into the camp. But his minister Joshua, the son of Nun, a young man, did not depart out of the tent.
Exod. And Moses said to Jehovah, See, thou say to me, Bring up this people,  thou have not let me know whom thou will send with me. Yet thou have said, I know thee by name,  thou have also found favor in my sight.
Exod. Now therefore, I pray thee, if I have found favor in thy sight, show me now thy ways, that I may know thee, to the end that I may find favor in thy sight. And consider that this nation is thy people.
Exod. And he said, My presence shall go with thee,  I will give thee rest.
Exod. And Moses said to him, If thy presence go not, do not carry us up from here.
Exod. For how shall it now be known that I have found favor in thy sight, I and thy people? Is it not in that thou go with us, so that we are separated, I and thy people, from all the people that are upon the face of the earth?
Exod. And Jehovah said to Moses, I will do this thing also that thou have spoken, for thou have found favor in my sight,  I know thee by name.
Exod. And he said, Show me, I pray thee, thy glory.
Exod. And he said, I will make all my goodness pass before thee,  will proclaim the name of Jehovah before thee. I will be merciful to whom I may be merciful,  I will be compassionate to whomever I may be compassionate.
Exod. And he said, Thou cannot see my face, for man shall not see me and live.
Exod. And Jehovah said, Behold, there is a place by me,  thou shall stand upon the rock.
Exod. And it shall come to pass, while my glory passes by, that I will put thee in a cleft of the rock,  will cover thee with my hand until I have passed by.
Exod. And I will take away my hand,  thou shall see my back,  my face shall not be seen.
Exod. And Jehovah said to Moses, Hew thee two tablets of stone like the first,  I will write upon the tablets the words that were on the first tablets, which thou broke.
Exod. And be ready by the morning,  come up in the morning to mount Sinai,  present thyself there to me on the top of the mount.
Exod. And no man shall come up with thee, neither let any man be seen throughout all the mount, neither let the flocks nor herds feed before that mount.
Exod. And he hewed two tablets of stone like the first. And Moses rose up early in the morning,  went up to mount Sinai, as Jehovah had commanded him,  took in his hand two tablets of stone.
Exod. And Jehovah descended in the cloud,  stood with him there,  proclaimed the name of Jehovah.
Exod. And Jehovah passed by before him,  proclaimed, Jehovah, Jehovah, a God merciful and gracious, slow to anger,  abundant in loving kindness and truth,
Exod. keeping loving kindness for thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin,  who will by no means clear the guilty, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the sons,  upon the sons's sons, upon the third and upon the fourth generation.
Exod. And Moses made haste,  bowed his head toward the earth,  worshiped.
Exod. And he said, If now I have found favor in thy sight, O Lord, let the Lord, I pray thee, go in the midst of us, for it is a stiff-necked people,  pardon our iniquity and our sin,  take us for thine inheritance.
Exod. And he said, Behold, I make a covenant. Before all thy people I will do marvels, such as have not been wrought in all the earth, nor in any nation,  all the people among which thou are shall see the work of Jehovah, for it is an awesome thing that I do with thee.
Exod. Observe thou that which I command thee this day. Behold, I drive out before thee the Amorite,  the Canaanite,  the Hittite,  the Perizzite,  the Hivite,  the Jebusite.
Exod. Take heed to thyself, lest thou make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land where thou go, lest it be for a snare in the midst of thee.
Exod. But ye shall break down their altars,  dash in pieces their pillars,  ye shall cut down their Asherim,
Exod. for thou shall worship no other god. For Jehovah, whose name is Jealous, is a jealous God.
Exod. Lest thou make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land,  they play the harlot after their gods,  sacrifice to their gods,  a man calls thee and thou eat of his sacrifice,
Exod. and thou take of their daughters to thy sons,  their daughters play the harlot after their gods,  make thy sons play the harlot after their gods.
Exod. Thou shall make thee no molten gods.
Exod. Thou shall keep the feast of unleavened bread. Seven days thou shall eat unleavened bread, as I commanded thee, at the time appointed in the month Abib, for in the month Abib thou came out from Egypt.
Exod. All that opens the womb is mine,  all thy cattle that is male, the firstlings of cow and sheep.
Exod. And the firstling of a donkey thou shall redeem with a lamb,  if thou will not redeem it, then thou shall break its neck. All the firstborn of thy sons thou shall redeem. And none shall appear before me empty.
Exod. Six days thou shall work,  on the seventh day thou shall rest; in plowing time and in harvest thou shall rest.
Exod. And thou shall observe the feast of weeks, even of the first-fruits of wheat harvest,  the feast of ingathering in the middle of the year.
Exod. Three times in the year all thy males shall appear before the lord Jehovah, the God of Israel.
Exod. For I will cast out nations before thee,  enlarge thy borders. Neither shall any man desire thy land, when thou go up to appear before Jehovah thy God three times in the year.
Exod. Thou shall not offer the blood of my sacrifice with leavened bread, nor shall the sacrifice of the feast of the Passover be left to the morning.
Exod. The first of the first-fruits of thy ground thou shall bring to the house of Jehovah thy God. Thou shall not boil a kid in its mother's milk.
Exod. And Jehovah said to Moses, Write thou these words, for after the tenor of these words I have made a covenant with thee and with Israel.
Exod. And he was there with Jehovah forty days and forty nights. He neither ate bread, nor drank water,  he wrote upon the tablets the words of the covenant, the ten commandments.
Exod. And it came to pass, when Moses came down from mount Sinai with the two tablets of the testimony in Moses' hand, when he came down from the mount, that Moses did not know that the skin of his face shone by reason of his speaking with him.
Exod. And when Aaron and all the sons of Israel saw Moses, behold, the skin of his face shone,  they were afraid to come near him.
Exod. And Moses called to them. And Aaron and all the rulers of the congregation returned to him,  Moses spoke to them.
Exod. And afterward all the sons of Israel came near,  he gave them in commandment all that Jehovah had spoken with him on mount Sinai.
Exod. And when Moses was done speaking with them, he put a veil on his face.
Exod. But when Moses went in before Jehovah to speak with him, he took the veil off, until he came out. And he came out,  spoke to the sons of Israel that which he was commanded.
Exod. And the sons of Israel saw the face of Moses, that the skin of Moses' face shone. And Moses put the veil upon his face again until he went in to speak with him.
Exod. And Moses assembled all the congregation of the sons of Israel,  said to them, These are the words which Jehovah has commanded, that ye should do them.
Exod. Six days work shall be done,  on the seventh day there shall be to you a holy day, a sabbath of solemn rest to Jehovah. Whoever does any work in it shall be put to death.
Exod. Ye shall kindle no fire throughout your habitations upon the sabbath day.
Exod. And Moses spoke to all the congregation of the sons of Israel, saying, This is the thing which Jehovah commanded, saying,
Exod. Take ye from among you an offering to Jehovah. Whoever is of a willing heart, let him bring it-Jehovah's offering: gold,  silver,  brass,
Exod. and blue,  purple,  scarlet,  fine linen,  goats' hair,
Exod. and rams' skins dyed red,  certain skins,  acacia wood,
Exod. and oil for the light,  spices for the anointing oil,  for the sweet incense,
Exod. and onyx stones,  stones to be set, for the ephod,  for the breastplate.
Exod. And let every wise-hearted man among you come,  make all that Jehovah has commanded:
Exod. the tabernacle, its tent,  its covering, its clasps,  its boards, its bars, its pillars,  its sockets,
Exod. the ark,  the staves of it, the mercy-seat,  the veil of the screen,
Exod. the table,  its staves,  all its vessels,  the showbread,
Exod. the lampstand also for the light,  its vessels,  its lamps,  the oil for the light,
Exod. and the altar of incense,  its staves,  the anointing oil,  the sweet incense,  the screen for the door, at the door of the tabernacle,
Exod. the altar of burnt offering, with its grating of brass, its staves,  all its vessels, the laver and its base,
Exod. the hangings of the court, the pillars of it,  their sockets,  the screen for the gate of the court,
Exod. the pegs of the tabernacle,  the pegs of the court,  their cords,
Exod. the finely wrought garments, for ministering in the holy place, the holy garments for Aaron the priest,  the garments of his sons, to minister in the priest's office.
Exod. And all the congregation of the sons of Israel departed from the presence of Moses.
Exod. And they came, everyone whose heart stirred him up,  everyone whom his spirit made willing,  brought Jehovah's offering, for the work of the tent of meeting,  for all the service of it,  for the holy garments.
Exod. And they came, both men and women, as many as were willing-hearted,  brought brooches,  earrings,  signet-rings,  armlets, all jewels of gold, even every man who offered an offering of gold to Jehovah.
Exod. And every man, with whom was found blue,  purple,  scarlet,  fine linen,  goats' hair,  rams' skins dyed red,  certain skins, brought them.
Exod. Everyone who offered an offering of silver and brass brought Jehovah's offering,  every man, with whom was found acacia wood for any work of the service, brought it.
Exod. And all the women who were wise-hearted spun with their hands,  brought that which they had spun: the blue,  the purple, the scarlet,  the fine linen.
Exod. And all the women whose heart stirred them up in wisdom spun the goats' hair.
Exod. And the rulers brought the onyx stones,  the stones to be set, for the ephod,  for the breastplate,
Exod. and the spice,  the oil, for the light,  for the anointing oil,  for the sweet incense.
Exod. The sons of Israel brought a freewill offering to Jehovah, every man and woman, whose heart made them willing to bring for all the work, which Jehovah had commanded to be made by Moses.
Exod. And Moses said to the sons of Israel, See, Jehovah has called by name Bezalel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah.
Exod. And he has filled him with the Spirit of God, in wisdom, in understanding,  in knowledge,  in all manner of workmanship,
Exod. and to devise skilful works, to work in gold,  in silver,  in brass,
Exod. and in cutting of stones for setting,  in carving of wood, to work in all manner of skilful workmanship.
Exod. And he has put in his heart that he may teach, both he,  Oholiab, the son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan.
Exod. He has filled them with wisdom of heart, to work all manner of workmanship, of the engraver,  of the skilful workman,  of the embroiderer, in blue,  in purple, in scarlet,  in fine linen,  of the weaver, even of those who do any workmanship,  of those who devise skilful works.
Exod. And Bezalel and Oholiab shall work,  every wise-hearted man, in whom Jehovah has put wisdom and understanding to know how to work all the work for the service of the sanctuary, according to all that Jehovah has commanded.
Exod. And Moses called Bezalel and Oholiab,  every wise-hearted man, in whose heart Jehovah had put wisdom, even everyone whose heart stirred him up to come to the work to do it,
Exod. and they received from Moses all the offering which the sons of Israel had brought for the work of the service of the sanctuary, with which to make it. And they brought yet to him freewill offerings every morning.
Exod. And all the wise men, who wrought all the work of the sanctuary, came every man from his work which they wrought.
Exod. And they spoke to Moses, saying, The people bring much more than enough for the service of the work which Jehovah commanded to make.
Exod. And Moses gave commandment,  they caused it to be proclaimed throughout the camp, saying, Let neither man nor woman make any more work for the offering of the sanctuary. So the people were restrained from bringing.
Exod. For the stuff they had was sufficient for all the work to make it,  too much.
Exod. And all the wise-hearted men among them who wrought the work made the tabernacle with ten curtains, of fine twined linen,  blue,  purple,  scarlet, with cherubim; the work of the skilful workman made them.
Exod. The length of each curtain was twenty-eight cubits,  the breadth of each curtain four cubits. All the curtains had one measure.
Exod. And he coupled five curtains one to another,  the other five curtains he coupled one to another.
Exod. And he made loops of blue upon the edge of the one curtain from the selvedge in the coupling. Likewise he made in the edge of the curtain that was outmost in the second coupling.
Exod. Fifty loops he made in the one curtain,  fifty loops he made in the edge of the curtain that was in the second coupling; the loops were opposite one to another.
Exod. And he made fifty clasps of gold,  coupled the curtains one to another with the clasps, so the tabernacle was one.
Exod. And he made curtains of goats' hair for a tent over the tabernacle. Eleven curtains he made them.
Exod. The length of each curtain was thirty cubits,  four cubits the breadth of each curtain. The eleven curtains had one measure.
Exod. And he coupled five curtains by themselves,  six curtains by themselves.
Exod. And he made fifty loops on the edge of the curtain that was outmost in the coupling,  fifty loops he made upon the edge of the curtain which was outmost in the second coupling.
Exod. And he made fifty clasps of brass to couple the tent together, that it might be one.
Exod. And he made a covering for the tent of rams' skins dyed red,  a covering of certain skins above.
Exod. And he made the boards for the tabernacle, of acacia wood, standing up.
Exod. Ten cubits was the length of a board,  a cubit and a half the breadth of each board.
Exod. Each board had two tenons, joined one to another. Thus he made for all the boards of the tabernacle.
Exod. And he made the boards for the tabernacle. Twenty boards for the south side southward.
Exod. And he made forty sockets of silver under the twenty boards, two sockets under one board for its two tenons,  two sockets under another board for its two tenons.
Exod. And for the second side of the tabernacle, on the north side, he made twenty boards,
Exod. and their forty sockets of silver, two sockets under one board,  two sockets under another board.
Exod. And for the hinder part of the tabernacle westward he made six boards.
Exod. And he made two boards for the corners of the tabernacle in the hinder part.
Exod. And they were double beneath,  in like manner they were entire to the top of it to one ring. Thus he did to both of them in the two corners.
Exod. And there were eight boards,  their sockets of silver, sixteen sockets, under every board two sockets.
Exod. And he made bars of acacia wood, five for the boards of the one side of the tabernacle,
Exod. and five bars for the boards of the other side of the tabernacle,  five bars for the boards of the tabernacle for the hinder part westward.
Exod. And he made the middle bar to pass through in the midst of the boards from the one end to the other.
Exod. And he overlaid the boards with gold. And made their rings of gold for places for the bars,  overlaid the bars with gold.
Exod. And he made the veil of blue,  purple,  scarlet,  fine twined linen. He made it with cherubim, the work of the skilful workman.
Exod. And he made for it four pillars of acacia,  overlaid them with gold. Their hooks were of gold,  he cast for them four sockets of silver.
Exod. And he made a screen for the door of the tent, of blue,  purple,  scarlet,  fine twined linen, the work of the embroiderer,
Exod. and the five pillars of it with their hooks. And he overlaid their capitals and their bands with gold,  their five sockets were of brass.
Exod. And Bezalel made the ark of acacia wood; two cubits and a half was the length of it,  a cubit and a half the breadth of it,  a cubit and a half the height of it.
Exod. And he overlaid it with pure gold inside and outside,  made a crown of gold to it round about.
Exod. And he cast four rings of gold for it, in the four feet of it, even two rings on the one side of it,  two rings on the other side of it.
Exod. And he made staves of acacia wood,  overlaid them with gold.
Exod. And he put the staves into the rings on the sides of the ark, to bear the ark.
Exod. And he made a mercy-seat of pure gold, two cubits and a half the length of it,  a cubit and a half the breadth of it.
Exod. And he made two cherubim of gold, of beaten work he made them, at the two ends of the mercy-seat,
Exod. one cherub at the one end,  one cherub at the other end, of one piece with the mercy-seat. He made the cherubim at the two ends of it.
Exod. And the cherubim spread out their wings on high, covering the mercy-seat with their wings, with their faces one to another. The faces of the cherubim were toward the mercy-seat.
Exod. And he made the table of acacia wood, two cubits the length of it,  a cubit the breadth of it,  a cubit and a half the height of it.
Exod. And he overlaid it with pure gold,  made thereunto a crown of gold round about.
Exod. And he made to it a border of a handbreadth round about,  made a golden crown to the border of it round about.
Exod. And he cast four rings of gold for it,  put the rings in the four corners that were on the four feet of it,
Exod. close by the border were the rings, the places for the staves to bear the table.
Exod. And he made the staves of acacia wood,  overlaid them with gold, to bear the table.
Exod. And he made the vessels which were upon the table, the dishes of it,  the spoons of it,  the bowls of it,  the flagons of it, with which to pour out, of pure gold.
Exod. And he made the lampstand of pure gold. He made the lampstand of beaten work, even its base,  its shaft, its cups, its knobs,  its flowers, were of one piece with it.
Exod. And there were six branches going out of the sides of it, three branches of the lampstand out of the one side of it,  three branches of the lampstand out of the other side of it,
Exod. three cups made like almond-blossoms in one branch, a knob and a flower,  three cups made like almond-blossoms in the other branch, a knob and a flower, so for the six branches going out of the lampstand.
Exod. And in the lampstand were four cups made like almond-blossoms, the knobs of it,  the flowers of it,
Exod. and a knob under two branches of one piece with it,  a knob under two branches of one piece with it,  a knob under two branches of one piece with it, for the six branches going out of it.
Exod. Their knobs and their branches were of one piece with it. The whole of it was one beaten work of pure gold.
Exod. And he made the lamps of it, seven,  the snuffers of it,  the snuff dishes of it, of pure gold.
Exod. He made it of a talent of pure gold,  all the vessels of it.
Exod. And he made the altar of incense of acacia wood: a cubit was the length of it,  a cubit the breadth of it, foursquare,  two cubits was the height of it. The horns of it were of one piece with it.
Exod. And he overlaid it with pure gold, the top of it,  the sides of it round about,  the horns of it. And he made to it a crown of gold round about.
Exod. And he made for it two golden rings under the crown of it, upon the two ribs of it, upon the two sides of it, for places for staves with which to bear it.
Exod. And he made the staves of acacia wood,  overlaid them with gold.
Exod. And he made the holy anointing oil,  the pure incense of sweet spices, after the art of the perfumer.
Exod. And he made the altar of burnt offering of acacia wood: five cubits was the length of it,  five cubits the breadth of it, foursquare,  three cubits the height of it.
Exod. And he made the horns of it upon the four corners of it. The horns of it were of one piece with it,  he overlaid it with brass.
Exod. And he made all the vessels of the altar: the pots,  the shovels,  the basins, the flesh-hooks,  the firepans. All the vessels of it he made of brass.
Exod. And he made for the altar a grating of network of brass, under the ledge around it beneath, reaching halfway up.
Exod. And he cast four rings for the four ends of the grating of brass, to be places for the staves.
Exod. And he made the staves of acacia wood,  overlaid them with brass.
Exod. And he put the staves into the rings on the sides of the altar, with which to bear it; he made it hollow with planks.
Exod. And he made the laver of brass,  the base of it of brass, from the mirrors of the women who fasted, who fasted by the doors of the tabernacle of witness, in the day in which he set it up.
Exod. And he made the court. For the south side southward the hangings of the court were of fine twined linen, a hundred cubits,
Exod. their pillars were twenty,  their sockets twenty, of brass. The hooks of the pillars and their bands were of silver.
Exod. And for the north side a hundred cubits, their pillars twenty,  their sockets twenty, of brass, the hooks of the pillars,  their bands, of silver.
Exod. And for the west side were hangings of fifty cubits, their pillars ten,  their sockets ten, the hooks of the pillars,  their bands, of silver.
Exod. And for the east side eastward fifty cubits.
Exod. The hangings for the one side of the gate were fifteen cubits, their pillars three,  their sockets three,
Exod. and so for the other side. On this hand and that hand by the gate of the court were hangings of fifteen cubits, their pillars three,  their sockets three.
Exod. All the hangings of the court round about were of fine twined linen.
Exod. And the sockets for the pillars were of brass, the hooks of the pillars,  their bands, of silver,  the overlaying of their capitals, of silver. And all the pillars of the court were banded with silver.
Exod. And the screen for the gate of the court was the work of the embroiderer, of blue,  purple,  scarlet,  fine twined linen. And twenty cubits was the length,  the height in the breadth was five cubits, answerable to the hangings of the court.
Exod. And their pillars were four,  their sockets four, of brass, their hooks of silver,  the overlaying of their capitals,  their bands, of silver.
Exod. And all the pegs of the tabernacle,  of the court round about, were of brass.
Exod. This is the sum of the tabernacle, even the tabernacle of the testimony, as they were counted, according to the commandment of Moses, for the service of the Levites, by the hand of Ithamar, the son of Aaron the priest.
Exod. And Bezalel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah, made all that Jehovah commanded Moses.
Exod. And with him was Oholiab, the son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan, an engraver,  a skilful workman,  an embroiderer in blue,  in purple,  in scarlet,  in fine linen.
Exod. All the gold that was used for the work in all the work of the sanctuary, even the gold of the offering, was twenty-nine talents,  seven hundred and thirty shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary.
Exod. And the silver from those who were numbered of the congregation was a hundred talents,  a thousand seven hundred and seventy-five shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary,
Exod. a beka a head, that is, half a shekel, after the shekel of the sanctuary, for everyone who passed over to those who were numbered, from twenty years old and upward, for six hundred and three thousand and five hundred and fifty men.
Exod. And the hundred talents of silver were for casting the sockets of the sanctuary,  the sockets of the veil, a hundred sockets for the hundred talents, a talent for a socket.
Exod. And of the thousand seven hundred seventy-five shekels he made hooks for the pillars,  overlaid their capitals,  made bands for them.
Exod. And the brass of the offering was seventy talents,  two thousand and four hundred shekels.
Exod. And with it he made the sockets to the door of the tent of meeting,  the brazen altar,  the brazen grating for it,  all the vessels of the altar,
Exod. and the sockets of the court round about,  the sockets of the gate of the court,  all the pegs of the tabernacle,  all the pegs of the court round about.
Exod. And of the blue,  purple,  scarlet, they made finely wrought garments, for ministering in the holy place,  made the holy garments for Aaron, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
Exod. And he made the ephod of gold, blue,  purple,  scarlet,  fine twined linen.
Exod. And they beat the gold into thin plates,  cut it into wires, to work it in the blue,  in the purple,  in the scarlet,  in the fine linen, the work of the skilful workman.
Exod. They made shoulder-pieces for it, joined together. It was joined together at the two ends.
Exod. And the skillfully woven band, that was upon it with which to gird it on, was of the same piece and like the work of it, of gold, of blue,  purple,  scarlet,  fine twined linen, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
Exod. And they wrought the onyx stones, enclosed in settings of gold, engraved with the engravings of a signet, according to the names of the sons of Israel.
Exod. And he put them on the shoulder-pieces of the ephod, to be stones of memorial for the sons of Israel, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
Exod. And he made the breastplate, the work of the skilful workman, like the work of the ephod, of gold, of blue,  purple,  scarlet,  fine twined linen.
Exod. It was foursquare. They made the breastplate double; a span was the length of it,  a span the breadth of it, being double.
Exod. And they set four rows of stones in it. A row of sardius, topaz,  carbuncle was the first row,
Exod. and the second row, an emerald, a sapphire,  a diamond,
Exod. and the third row, a jacinth, an agate,  an amethyst,
Exod. and the fourth row, a beryl, an onyx,  a jasper. They were set in enclosures of gold in their settings.
Exod. And the stones were according to the names of the sons of Israel, twelve, according to their names, like the engravings of a signet, each one according to his name, for the twelve tribes.
Exod. And they made upon the breastplate chains like cords, of wreathen work of pure gold.
Exod. And they made two settings of gold,  two gold rings,  put the two rings on the two ends of the breastplate.
Exod. And they put the two wreathen chains of gold in the two rings at the ends of the breastplate.
Exod. And the other two ends of the two wreathen chains they put on the two settings,  put them on the shoulder-pieces of the ephod, in the forepart of it.
Exod. And they made two rings of gold,  put them upon the two ends of the breastplate, upon the edge of it, which was toward the side of the ephod inward.
Exod. And they made two rings of gold,  put them on the two shoulder-pieces of the ephod underneath, in the forepart of it, close by the coupling of it, above the skillfully woven band of the ephod.
Exod. And they bound the breastplate by the rings of it to the rings of the ephod with a lace of blue, that it might be upon the skillfully woven band of the ephod,  that the breastplate might not be loosed from the ephod, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
Exod. And he made the robe of the ephod of woven work, all of blue.
Exod. And the hole of the robe in the midst of it, as the hole of a coat of mail, with a binding round about the hole of it, that it should not be torn.
Exod. And they made upon the skirts of the robe pomegranates of blue,  purple,  scarlet, twined.
Exod. And they made bells of pure gold,  put the bells between the pomegranates upon the skirts of the robe round about, between the pomegranates,
Exod. a bell and a pomegranate, a bell and a pomegranate, upon the skirts of the robe round about, to minister in, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
Exod. And they made the tunics of fine linen of woven work for Aaron,  for his sons,
Exod. and the miter of fine linen,  the goodly head-coverings of fine linen,  the linen breeches of fine twined linen,
Exod. and the sash of fine twined linen,  blue,  purple,  scarlet, the work of the embroiderer, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
Exod. And they made the plate of the holy crown of pure gold,  wrote upon it a writing, like the engravings of a signet, HOLY TO JEHOVAH.
Exod. And they tied to it a lace of blue, to fasten it upon the miter above, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
Exod. Thus was finished all the work of the tabernacle of the tent of meeting. And the sons of Israel did according to all that Jehovah commanded Moses, so did they.
Exod. And they brought the tabernacle to Moses, the tent,  all its furniture: its clasps, its boards, it bars,  its pillars,  it sockets,
Exod. and the covering of rams' skins dyed red,  the covering of certain skins,  the veil of the screen,
Exod. the ark of the testimony,  the staves of it,  the mercy-seat,
Exod. the table, all the vessels of it,  the showbread,
Exod. the pure lampstand, the lamps of it, even the lamps to be set in order,  all the vessels of it,  the oil for the light,
Exod. and the golden altar,  the anointing oil,  the sweet incense,  the screen for the door of the tent,
Exod. the brazen altar,  its grating of brass, its staves,  all its vessels, the laver and its base,
Exod. the hangings of the court, its pillars,  its sockets,  the screen for the gate of the court, the cords of it,  the pegs of it,  all the instruments of the service of the tabernacle, for the tent of meeting,
Exod. the finely wrought garments for ministering in the holy place,  the holy garments for Aaron the priest,  the garments of his sons, to minister in the priest's office.
Exod. According to all that Jehovah commanded Moses, so the sons of Israel did all the work.
Exod. And Moses saw all the work, , behold, they had done it, as Jehovah had commanded, even so they had done it. And Moses blessed them.
Exod. And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Exod. On the first day of the first month thou shall raise up the tabernacle of the tent of meeting.
Exod. And thou shall put the ark of the testimony in it,  thou shall screen the ark with the veil.
Exod. And thou shall bring in the table,  set in order the things that are upon it,  thou shall bring in the lampstand,  light the lamps of it.
Exod. And thou shall set the golden altar for incense before the ark of the testimony,  put the screen of the door to the tabernacle.
Exod. And thou shall set the altar of burnt offering before the door of the tabernacle of the tent of meeting.
Exod. And thou shall set the laver between the tent of meeting and the altar,  shall put water in it.
Exod. And thou shall set up the court round about,  hang up the screen of the gate of the court.
Exod. And thou shall take the anointing oil,  anoint the tabernacle,  all that is in it,  shall hallow it,  all the furniture of it. And it shall be holy.
Exod. And thou shall anoint the altar of burnt offering,  all its vessels,  sanctify the altar. And the altar shall be most holy.
Exod. And thou shall anoint the laver and its base,  sanctify it.
Exod. And thou shall bring Aaron and his sons to the door of the tent of meeting,  shall wash them with water.
Exod. And thou shall put upon Aaron the holy garments,  thou shall anoint him,  sanctify him, that he may minister to me in the priest's office.
Exod. And thou shall bring his sons,  put tunics upon them,
Exod. and thou shall anoint them, as thou anointed their father, that they may minister to me in the priest's office. And their anointing shall be to them for an everlasting priesthood throughout their generations.
Exod. Thus did Moses. According to all that Jehovah commanded him, so did he.
Exod. And it came to pass in the first month in the second year, on the first day of the month, that the tabernacle was raised up.
Exod. And Moses raised up the tabernacle,  laid its sockets,  set up the boards of it,  put in the bars of it,  raised up its pillars.
Exod. And he spread the tent over the tabernacle,  put the covering of the tent above upon it, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
Exod. And he took and put the testimony into the ark,  set the staves on the ark,  put the mercy-seat above upon the ark.
Exod. And he brought the ark into the tabernacle,  set up the veil of the screen,  screened the ark of the testimony, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
Exod. And he put the table in the tent of meeting, upon the side of the tabernacle northward, outside the veil.
Exod. And he set the bread in order upon it before Jehovah, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
Exod. And he put the lampstand in the tent of meeting, opposite the table, on the side of the tabernacle southward.
Exod. And he lit the lamps before Jehovah, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
Exod. And he put the golden altar in the tent of meeting before the veil,
Exod. and he burnt incense of sweet spices on it, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
Exod. And he put the screen of the door to the tabernacle.
Exod. And he set the altar of burnt offering at the door of the tabernacle of the tent of meeting,  offered upon it the burnt offering and the meal offering, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
Exod. And he set the laver between the tent of meeting and the altar,  put water in it, with which to wash.
Exod. And Moses and Aaron and his sons washed their hands and their feet there.
Exod. They washed when they went into the tent of meeting,  when they came near to the altar, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
Exod. And he raised up the court round about the tabernacle and the altar,  set up the screen of the gate of the court. So Moses finished the work.
Exod. Then the cloud covered the tent of meeting,  the glory of Jehovah filled the tabernacle.
Exod. And Moses was not able to enter into the tent of meeting, because the cloud abode thereupon,  the glory of Jehovah filled the tabernacle.
Exod. And when the cloud was taken up from over the tabernacle, the sons of Israel went onward, throughout all their journeys,
Exod. but if the cloud was not taken up, then they did not journey till the day that it was taken up.
Exod. For the cloud of Jehovah was upon the tabernacle by day,  there was fire therein by night, in the sight of all the house of Israel, throughout all their journeys.
Leviticus
Jehovah called to Moses,  spoke to him out of the tent of meeting, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel,  say to them, When any man of you offers an oblation to Jehovah, ye shall offer your oblation of the cattle, even of the herd and of the flock.
If his oblation be a burnt offering of the herd, he shall offer it a male without blemish. He shall offer it at the door of the tent of meeting, that he may be accepted before Jehovah.
he shall lay his hand upon the head of the burnt offering,  it shall be accepted for him to make atonement for him.
he shall kill the bullock before Jehovah,  Aaron's sons, the priests, shall present the blood,  sprinkle the blood round about upon the altar that is at the door of the tent of meeting.
he shall skin the burnt offering,  cut it into its pieces.
the sons of Aaron the priest shall put fire upon the altar,  lay wood in order upon the fire.
Aaron's sons, the priests, shall lay the pieces, the head,  the fat, in order upon the wood that is on the fire which is upon the altar,
but its innards and its legs he shall wash with water. And the priest shall burn the whole on the altar, for a burnt offering, an offering made by fire, of a sweet savor to Jehovah.
if his oblation be of the flock, of the sheep, or of the goats, for a burnt offering, he shall offer it a male without blemish.
he shall kill it on the side of the altar northward before Jehovah,  Aaron's sons, the priests, shall sprinkle its blood upon the altar round about.
he shall cut it into its pieces, with its head and its fat,  the priest shall lay them in order on the wood that is on the fire which is upon the altar,
but the innards and the legs he shall wash with water. And the priest shall offer the whole,  burn it upon the altar. It is a burnt offering, an offering made by fire, of a sweet savor to Jehovah.
if his oblation to Jehovah be a burnt offering of birds, then he shall offer his oblation of turtle-doves, or of young pigeons.
the priest shall bring it to the altar,  wring off its head,  burn it on the altar. And the blood of it shall be drained out on the side of the altar.
he shall take away its crop with the filth of it,  cast it beside the altar on the east part, in the place of the ashes.
he shall rend it by the wings of it,  shall not divide it apart,  the priest shall burn it upon the altar, upon the wood that is upon the fire. It is a burnt offering, an offering made by fire, of a sweet savor to Jehovah.
when anyone offers an oblation of a meal offering to Jehovah, his oblation shall be of fine flour,  he shall pour oil upon it,  put frankincense on it.
he shall bring it to Aaron's sons the priests,  he shall take out of it his handful of the fine flour of it,  of the oil of it, with all the frankincense of it. And the priest shall burn the memorial of it upon the altar, an offering made by fire, of a sweet savor to Jehovah.
that which is left of the meal offering shall be Aaron's and his sons'. It is a thing most holy of the offerings of Jehovah made by fire.
when thou offer an oblation of a meal offering baked in the oven, it shall be unleavened cakes of fine flour mingled with oil, or unleavened wafers anointed with oil.
if thy oblation be a meal offering of the baking-pan, it shall be of fine flour unleavened, mingled with oil.
Thou shall part it in pieces,  pour oil in it. It is a meal offering.
if thy oblation be a meal offering of the frying-pan, it shall be made of fine flour with oil.
thou shall bring the meal offering that is made of these things to Jehovah,  it shall be presented to the priest,  he shall bring it to the altar.
the priest shall take up from the meal offering the memorial of it,  shall burn it upon the altar, an offering made by fire, of a sweet savor to Jehovah.
that which is left of the meal offering shall be Aaron's and his sons'. It is a thing most holy of the offerings of Jehovah made by fire.
No meal offering, which ye shall offer to Jehovah, shall be made with leaven, for ye shall burn no leaven, nor any honey, as an offering made by fire to Jehovah.
As an oblation of first-fruits ye shall offer them to Jehovah,  they shall not come up for a sweet savor on the altar.
every oblation of thy meal offering thou shall season with salt, nor shall thou allow the salt of the covenant of thy God to be lacking from thy meal offering. With all thine oblations thou shall offer salt.
if thou offer a meal offering of first-fruits to Jehovah, thou shall offer for the meal offering of thy first-fruits grain in the ear parched with fire, crushed grain of the fresh ear.
thou shall put oil upon it,  lay frankincense on it. It is a meal offering.
the priest shall burn the memorial of it, part of the crushed grain of it,  part of the oil of it, with all the frankincense of it. It is an offering made by fire to Jehovah.
if his oblation be a sacrifice of peace offerings, if he offer of the herd, whether male or female, he shall offer it without blemish before Jehovah.
he shall lay his hand upon the head of his oblation,  kill it at the door of the tent of meeting. And Aaron's sons the priests shall sprinkle the blood upon the altar round about.
he shall offer of the sacrifice of peace offerings an offering made by fire to Jehovah, he shall take away the fat that covers the innards,  all the fat that is upon the innards,
the two kidneys,  the fat that is on them, which is by the loins,  the caul upon the liver, with the kidneys.
Aaron's sons shall burn it on the altar upon the burnt offering, which is upon the wood that is on the fire. It is an offering made by fire, of a sweet savor to Jehovah.
if his oblation for a sacrifice of peace offerings to Jehovah be of the flock, male or female, he shall offer it without blemish.
If he offers a lamb for his oblation, then he shall offer it before Jehovah.
he shall lay his hand upon the head of his oblation,  kill it before the tent of meeting. And Aaron's sons shall sprinkle the blood of it upon the altar round about.
he shall offer of the sacrifice of peace offerings an offering made by fire to Jehovah. The fat of it, the entire fat tail, he shall take away close by the backbone. And he shall take away the fat that covers the innards,  all the fat that is upon the innards,
the two kidneys,  the fat that is upon them, which is by the loins,  the caul upon the liver, with the kidneys.
the priest shall burn it upon the altar. It is the food of the offering made by fire to Jehovah.
if his oblation be a goat, then he shall offer it before Jehovah.
he shall lay his hand upon the head of it,  kill it before the tent of meeting. And the sons of Aaron shall sprinkle the blood of it upon the altar round about.
he shall offer his oblation from it, even an offering made by fire to Jehovah. He shall take away the fat that covers the innards,  all the fat that is upon the innards,
the two kidneys,  the fat that is upon them, which is by the loins,  the caul upon the liver, with the kidneys.
the priest shall burn them upon the altar. It is the food of the offering made by fire, for a sweet savor. All the fat is Jehovah's.
It shall be a perpetual statute throughout your generations in all your dwellings, that ye shall eat neither fat nor blood.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel, saying, If a soul shall sin unwittingly, in any of the things which Jehovah has commanded not to be done,  shall do any one of them,
if the anointed priest shall sin so as to bring guilt on the people, then let him offer for his sin, which he has sinned, a young bullock without blemish to Jehovah for a sin offering.
he shall bring the bullock to the door of the tent of meeting before Jehovah. And he shall lay his hand upon the head of the bullock,  kill the bullock before Jehovah.
the anointed priest shall take of the blood of the bullock,  bring it to the tent of meeting.
the priest shall dip his finger in the blood,  sprinkle of the blood seven times before Jehovah, before the veil of the sanctuary.
the priest shall put of the blood upon the horns of the altar of sweet incense before Jehovah, which is in the tent of meeting,  all the blood of the bullock he shall pour out at the base of the altar of burnt offering, which is at the door of the tent of meeting.
all the fat of the bullock of the sin offering he shall take off from it. The fat that covers the innards,  all the fat that is upon the innards,
the two kidneys,  the fat that is upon them, which is by the loins,  the caul upon the liver, with the kidneys, he shall take away,
as it is taken off from the ox of the sacrifice of peace offerings. And the priest shall burn them upon the altar of burnt offering.
the skin of the bullock,  all its flesh, with its head,  with its legs,  its innards,  its dung,
even the whole bullock he shall carry forth outside the camp to a clean place, where the ashes are poured out,  burn it on wood with fire. It shall be burnt where the ashes are poured out.
if the whole congregation of Israel err,  the thing be hid from the eyes of the assembly,  they have done any of the things which Jehovah has commanded not to be done,  are guilty,
when the sin by which they have sinned is known, then the assembly shall offer a young bullock for a sin offering,  bring it before the tent of meeting.
the elders of the congregation shall lay their hands upon the head of the bullock before Jehovah,  the bullock shall be killed before Jehovah.
the anointed priest shall bring of the blood of the bullock to the tent of meeting.
the priest shall dip his finger in the blood,  sprinkle it seven times before Jehovah, before the veil.
he shall put of the blood upon the horns of the altar which is before Jehovah, that is in the tent of meeting,  all the blood he shall pour out at the base of the altar of burnt offering, which is at the door of the tent of meeting.
all the fat of it he shall take off from it,  burn it upon the altar.
Thus he shall do with the bullock, as he did with the bullock of the sin offering, so he shall do with this. And the priest shall make atonement for them,  they shall be forgiven.
he shall carry forth the bullock outside the camp,  burn it as he burned the first bullock. It is the sin offering for the assembly.
When a ruler sins,  does unwittingly any one of all the things which Jehovah his God has commanded not to be done,  is guilty,
if his sin, by which he has sinned, be made known to him, he shall bring for his oblation a goat, a male without blemish.
he shall lay his hand upon the head of the goat,  kill it in the place where they kill the burnt offering before Jehovah. It is a sin offering.
the priest shall take of the blood of the sin offering with his finger,  put it upon the horns of the altar of burnt offering,  the blood of it he shall pour out at the base of the altar of burnt offering.
all the fat of it he shall burn upon the altar, as the fat of the sacrifice of peace offerings. And the priest shall make atonement for him as concerning his sin,  he shall be forgiven.
if any soul of the common people sin unwittingly, in doing any of the things which Jehovah has commanded not to be done,  be guilty,
if his sin, which he has sinned, be made known to him, then he shall bring for his oblation a goat, a female without blemish, for his sin which he has sinned.
he shall lay his hand upon the head of the sin offering,  kill the sin offering in the place of burnt offering.
the priest shall take of the blood of it with his finger,  put it upon the horns of the altar of burnt offering,  all the blood of it he shall pour out at the base of the altar.
all the fat of it he shall take away, as the fat is taken away from off the sacrifice of peace offerings,  the priest shall burn it upon the altar for a sweet savor to Jehovah. And the priest shall make atonement for him,  he shall be forgiven.
if he brings a lamb as his oblation for a sin offering, he shall bring it a female without blemish.
he shall lay his hand upon the head of the sin offering,  kill it for a sin offering in the place where they kill the burnt offering.
the priest shall take of the blood of the sin offering with his finger,  put it upon the horns of the altar of burnt offering,  all the blood of it he shall pour out at the base of the altar.
all the fat of it he shall take away, as the fat of the lamb is taken away from the sacrifice of peace offerings,  the priest shall burn them on the altar, upon the offerings of Jehovah made by fire. And the priest shall make atonement for him concerning his sin that he has sinned,  he shall be forgiven.
if a soul sins, in that he hears the voice of an oath, he being a witness, whether he has seen or known, if he does not testify, then he shall bear his iniquity.
Or if a soul touches any unclean thing, whether it be the carcass of an unclean beast, or the carcass of unclean cattle, or the carcass of unclean creeping things,  it be hidden from him,  he be unclean, then he shall be guilty.
Or if he touch the uncleanness of man, whatever his uncleanness be with which he is unclean,  it be hid from him, when he knows of it, then he shall be guilty.
Or if a soul swears rashly with his lips to do evil, or to do good, whatever it be that a man shall utter rashly with an oath,  it be hid from him, when he realizes it, then he shall be guilty in one of these.
it shall be, when he shall be guilty in one of these, that he shall confess that by which he has sinned.
he shall bring his trespass offering to Jehovah for his sin which he has sinned, a female from the flock, a lamb or a goat, for a sin offering. And the priest shall make atonement for him as concerning his sin.
if his means is not sufficient for a lamb, then he shall bring his trespass offering for that by which he has sinned, two turtle-doves, or two young pigeons, to Jehovah, one for a sin offering,  the other for a burnt offering.
he shall bring them to the priest, who shall offer that which is for the sin offering first,  wring off its head from its neck,  shall not divide it apart.
he shall sprinkle of the blood of the sin offering upon the side of the altar,  the rest of the blood shall be drained out at the base of the altar. It is a sin offering.
he shall offer the second for a burnt offering, according to the ordinance. And the priest shall make atonement for him as concerning his sin which he has sinned,  he shall be forgiven.
But if his means is not sufficient for two turtle-doves, or two young pigeons, then he shall bring his oblation for that by which he has sinned, the tenth part of an ephah of fine flour for a sin offering. He shall put no oil upon it, nor shall he put any frankincense on it, for it is a sin offering.
he shall bring it to the priest,  the priest shall take his handful of it as the memorial of it,  burn it on the altar, upon the offerings of Jehovah made by fire. It is a sin offering.
the priest shall make atonement for him concerning his sin that he has sinned in any of these things,  he shall be forgiven. And the remnant shall be the priest's, as the meal offering.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
If a soul commits a trespass,  sins unwittingly in the holy things of Jehovah, then he shall bring his trespass offering to Jehovah, a ram without blemish out of the flock, according to thy estimation in silver by shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, for a trespass offering.
he shall make restitution for that which he has done amiss in the holy thing,  shall add the fifth part to it,  give it to the priest. And the priest shall make atonement for him with the ram of the trespass offering,  he shall be forgiven.
if a soul sins,  does any of the things which Jehovah has commanded not to be done, though he did not know it, yet he is guilty,  shall bear his iniquity.
he shall bring a ram without blemish out of the flock, according to thy estimation, for a trespass offering, to the priest. And the priest shall make atonement for him concerning the thing by which he erred unwittingly and knew it not,  he shall be forgiven.
It is a trespass offering. He is certainly guilty before Jehovah.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
If a soul sins,  commits a trespass against Jehovah,  deals falsely with his neighbor in a matter of deposit, or of bargain, or of robbery, or have oppressed his neighbor,
or has found that which was lost,  deal falsely by it,  swears to a lie, in any of all these things that a man does, sinning by it,
then it shall be, if he has sinned,  is guilty, that he shall restore that which he took by robbery, or the thing which he has gotten by oppression, or the deposit which was committed to him, or the lost thing which he found,
or anything about which he has sworn falsely, he shall even restore it in full,  shall add the fifth part more to it. He shall give it to him to whom it pertains, in the day of his being found guilty.
he shall bring his trespass offering to Jehovah, a ram without blemish out of the flock, according to thy estimation, for a trespass offering, to the priest.
the priest shall make atonement for him before Jehovah,  he shall be forgiven concerning whatever he does so as to be guilty by it.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Command Aaron and his sons, saying, This is the law of the burnt offering: The burnt offering shall be on the hearth upon the altar all night to the morning,  the fire of the altar shall be kept burning on it.
the priest shall put on his linen garment,  he shall put his linen breeches upon his flesh,  he shall take up the ashes of the fire which has consumed the burnt offering on the altar,  he shall put them beside the altar.
he shall put off his garments,  put on other garments,  carry forth the ashes outside the camp to a clean place.
the fire upon the altar shall be kept burning on it; it shall not go out. And the priest shall burn wood on it every morning,  he shall lay the burnt offering in order upon it,  shall burn the fat of the peace offerings on it.
Fire shall be kept burning upon the altar continually; it shall not go out.
this is the law of the meal offering: The sons of Aaron shall offer it before Jehovah, before the altar.
he shall take up his handful from it, of the fine flour of the meal offering,  of the oil of it,  all the frankincense which is upon the meal offering,  shall burn it upon the altar for a sweet savor, as the memorial of it, to Jehovah.
that which is left of it Aaron and his sons shall eat. It shall be eaten without leaven in a holy place. They shall eat it in the court of the tent of meeting.
It shall not be baked with leaven. I have given it as their portion of my offerings made by fire, it is most holy, as the sin offering,  as the trespass offering.
Every male among the sons of Aaron shall eat of it, as a portion forever throughout your generations, from the offerings of Jehovah made by fire. Whoever touches them shall be holy.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
This is the oblation of Aaron and of his sons, which they shall offer to Jehovah in the day when he is anointed: the tenth part of an ephah of fine flour for a meal offering perpetually, half of it in the morning,  half of it in the evening.
It shall be made with oil on a baking-pan. Thou shall bring it in when it is soaked. Thou shall offer the meal offering in baked pieces for a sweet savor to Jehovah.
the anointed priest who shall be in his stead from among his sons shall offer it. It shall be wholly burnt to Jehovah by a statute forever.
every meal offering of the priest shall be wholly burnt; it shall not be eaten.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to Aaron and to his sons, saying, This is the law of the sin offering: In the place where the burnt offering is killed the sin offering shall be killed before Jehovah. It is most holy.
The priest who offers it for sin shall eat it. It shall be eaten in a holy place, in the court of the tent of meeting.
Whatever shall touch the flesh of it shall be holy. And when there is of the blood sprinkled upon any garment, thou shall wash that on which it was sprinkled in a holy place.
But the earthen vessel in which it is boiled shall be broken,  if it be boiled in a brazen vessel, it shall be scoured,  rinsed in water.
Every male among the priests shall eat of it. It is most holy.
no sin offering, from which any of the blood is brought into the tent of meeting to make atonement in the holy place, shall be eaten; it shall be burnt with fire.
this is the law of the trespass offering. It is most holy.
In the place where they kill the burnt offering they shall kill the trespass offering,  the blood of it he shall sprinkle upon the altar round about.
he shall offer from it all the fat of it. He shall take away the fat tail,  the fat that covers the innards,
the two kidneys,  the fat that is on them, which is by the loins,  the caul upon the liver, with the kidneys.
the priest shall burn them upon the altar for an offering made by fire to Jehovah. It is a trespass offering.
Every male among the priests shall eat of it. It shall be eaten in a holy place; it is most holy.
As is the sin offering, so is the trespass offering, there is one law for them. The priest who makes atonement with it, he shall have it.
the priest who offers any man's burnt offering, even the priest shall have to himself the skin of the burnt offering which he has offered.
every meal offering that is baked in the oven,  all that is dressed in the frying-pan,  on the baking-pan, shall be the priest's who offers it.
every meal offering, mingled with oil, or dry, all the sons of Aaron shall have, one as well as another.
this is the law of the sacrifice of peace offerings, which he shall offer to Jehovah.
If he offers it for a thanksgiving, then he shall offer with the sacrifice of thanksgiving unleavened cakes mingled with oil,  unleavened wafers anointed with oil,  cakes mingled with oil, of fine flour soaked.
He shall offer his oblation with the sacrifice of his peace offerings for thanksgiving with cakes of leavened bread.
from it he shall offer one out of each oblation for a heave offering to Jehovah. It shall be the priest's who sprinkles the blood of the peace offerings.
the flesh of the sacrifice of his peace offerings for thanksgiving shall be eaten on the day of his oblation; he shall not leave any of it until the morning.
But if the sacrifice of his oblation be a vow, or a freewill offering, it shall be eaten on the day that he offers his sacrifice,  on the morrow that which remains of it shall be eaten,
but that which remains of the flesh of the sacrifice on the third day shall be burnt with fire.
if any of the flesh of the sacrifice of his peace offerings is eaten on the third day, it shall not be accepted, nor shall it be imputed to him who offers it. It shall be an abomination,  the soul that eats of it shall bear his iniquity.
the flesh that touches any unclean thing shall not be eaten; it shall be burnt with fire. And as for the flesh, every clean man shall eat of it,
but the soul that eats of the flesh of the sacrifice of peace offerings, that pertain to Jehovah, having his uncleanness upon him, that soul shall be cut off from his people.
when a soul shall touch any unclean thing, the uncleanness of man, or an unclean beast, or any unclean abomination,  eats of the flesh of the sacrifice of peace offerings, which pertain to Jehovah, that soul shall be cut off from his people.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel, saying, Ye shall eat no fat, of ox, or sheep, or goat.
the fat of that which dies of itself,  the fat of that which is torn of beasts, may be used for any other service,  ye shall certainly not eat of it.
For whoever eats the fat of the beast, of which men offer an offering made by fire to Jehovah, even the soul that eats it shall be cut off from his people.
ye shall eat no manner of blood, whether it be of bird or of beast, in any of your dwellings.
Whoever it is who eats any blood, that soul shall be cut off from his people.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel, saying, He who offers the sacrifice of his peace offerings to Jehovah shall bring his oblation to Jehovah out of the sacrifice of his peace offerings.
His own hands shall bring the offerings of Jehovah made by fire. He shall bring the fat with the breast, that the breast may be waved for a wave offering before Jehovah.
the priest shall burn the fat upon the altar,  the breast shall be Aaron's and his sons'.
the right thigh ye shall give to the priest for a heave offering out of the sacrifices of your peace offerings.
He among the sons of Aaron who offers the blood of the peace offerings,  the fat, shall have the right thigh for a portion.
For I have taken the wave-breast and the heave-thigh from the sons of Israel out of the sacrifices of their peace offerings,  have given them to Aaron the priest and to his sons as a portion forever from the sons of Israel.
This is the anointing-portion of Aaron,  the anointing-portion of his sons, out of the offerings of Jehovah made by fire, in the day when he presented them to minister to Jehovah in the priest's office,
which Jehovah commanded to be given them from the sons of Israel, in the day that he anointed them. It is a portion forever throughout their generations.
This is the law of the burnt offering, of the meal offering,  of the sin offering,  of the trespass offering,  of the consecration,  of the sacrifice of peace offerings,
which Jehovah commanded Moses at mount Sinai, in the day that he commanded the sons of Israel to offer their oblations to Jehovah, in the wilderness of Sinai.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Take Aaron and his sons with him,  the garments,  the anointing oil,  the bullock of the sin offering,  the two rams,  the basket of unleavened bread,
assemble thou all the congregation at the door of the tent of meeting.
Moses did as Jehovah commanded him,  the congregation was assembled at the door of the tent of meeting.
Moses said to the congregation, This is the thing which Jehovah has commanded to be done.
Moses brought Aaron and his sons,  washed them with water.
he put upon him the tunic,  girded him with the sash,  clothed him with the robe,  put the ephod upon him,  he girded him with the skillfully woven band of the ephod,  bound it to him therewith.
he placed the breastplate upon him,  he put the Urim and the Thummim in the breastplate.
he set the miter upon his head. And upon the miter, in front, he set the golden plate, the holy crown, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
Moses took the anointing oil,  anointed the tabernacle and all that was in it,  sanctified them.
he sprinkled of it upon the altar seven times,  anointed the altar and all its vessels,  the laver and its base, to sanctify them.
he poured of the anointing oil upon Aaron's head,  anointed him, to sanctify him.
Moses brought Aaron's sons,  clothed them with tunics,  girded them with sashes,  bound head-coverings upon them, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
he brought the bullock of the sin offering. And Aaron and his sons laid their hands upon the head of the bullock of the sin offering,
he killed it. And Moses took the blood,  put it upon the horns of the altar round about with his finger,  purified the altar,  poured out the blood at the base of the altar,  sanctified it, to make atonement for it.
he took all the fat that was upon the innards,  the caul of the liver,  the two kidneys,  their fat,  Moses burned it upon the altar.
But the bullock,  its skin,  its flesh,  its dung, he burnt with fire outside the camp, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
he presented the ram of the burnt offering. And Aaron and his sons laid their hands upon the head of the ram,
he killed it. And Moses sprinkled the blood upon the altar round about.
he cut the ram into its pieces,  Moses burnt the head,  the pieces,  the fat.
he washed the innards and the legs with water. And Moses burnt the whole ram upon the altar. It was a burnt offering for a sweet savor. It was an offering made by fire to Jehovah, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
he presented the other ram, the ram of consecration. And Aaron and his sons laid their hands upon the head of the ram,
he killed it. And Moses took of the blood of it,  put it upon the tip of Aaron's right ear,  upon the thumb of his right hand,  upon the great toe of his right foot.
he brought Aaron's sons,  Moses put of the blood upon the tip of their right ear,  upon the thumb of their right hand,  upon the great toe of their right foot. And Moses sprinkled the blood upon the altar round about.
he took the fat,  the fat tail,  all the fat that was upon the innards,  the caul of the liver,  the two kidneys,  their fat,  the right thigh,
out of the basket of unleavened bread, that was before Jehovah, he took one unleavened cake,  one cake of oiled bread,  one wafer,  placed them on the fat,  upon the right thigh.
he put the whole upon the hands of Aaron,  upon the hands of his sons,  waved them for a wave offering before Jehovah.
Moses took them from off their hands,  burnt them on the altar upon the burnt offering. They were a consecration for a sweet savor. It was an offering made by fire to Jehovah.
Moses took the breast,  waved it for a wave offering before Jehovah. It was Moses' portion of the ram of consecration, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
Moses took of the anointing oil,  of the blood which was upon the altar,  sprinkled it upon Aaron, upon his garments,  upon his sons,  upon his sons' garments with him,  sanctified Aaron, his garments,  his sons,  his sons' garments with him.
Moses said to Aaron and to his sons, Boil the flesh at the door of the tent of meeting,  there eat it and the bread that is in the basket of consecration, as I commanded, saying, Aaron and his sons shall eat it.
that which remains of the flesh and of the bread ye shall burn with fire.
ye shall not go out from the door of the tent of meeting seven days, until the days of your consecration be fulfilled, for he shall consecrate you seven days.
As has been done this day, so Jehovah has commanded to do, to make atonement for you.
ye shall remain at the door of the tent of meeting day and night seven days,  keep the charge of Jehovah, that ye not die, for so I am commanded.
Aaron and his sons did all the things which Jehovah commanded by Moses.
it came to pass on the eighth day, that Moses called Aaron and his sons,  the elders of Israel,
he said to Aaron, Take thee a calf of the herd for a sin offering,  a ram for a burnt offering, without blemish,  offer them before Jehovah.
thou shall speak to the sons of Israel, saying, Take ye a he-goat for a sin offering,  a calf and a lamb, both a year old, without blemish, for a burnt offering,
an ox and a ram for peace offerings, to sacrifice before Jehovah,  a meal offering mingled with oil. For today Jehovah appears to you.
they brought that which Moses commanded before the tent of meeting,  all the congregation drew near and stood before Jehovah.
Moses said, This is the thing which Jehovah commanded that ye should do,  the glory of Jehovah shall appear to you.
Moses said to Aaron, Draw near to the altar,  offer thy sin offering,  thy burnt offering,  make atonement for thyself,  for the people. And offer the oblation of the people,  make atonement for them, as Jehovah commanded.
So Aaron drew near to the altar,  killed the calf of the sin offering, which was for himself.
the sons of Aaron presented the blood to him,  he dipped his finger in the blood,  put it upon the horns of the altar,  poured out the blood at the base of the altar,
but he burnt the fat,  the kidneys,  the caul from the liver of the sin offering, upon the altar, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
he burnt the flesh and the skin with fire outside the camp.
he killed the burnt offering. And Aaron's sons delivered to him the blood,  he sprinkled it upon the altar round about.
they delivered the burnt offering to him, piece by piece,  the head,  he burnt them upon the altar.
he washed the innards and the legs,  burnt them upon the burnt offering on the altar.
he presented the people's oblation. And took the goat of the sin offering which was for the people,  killed it,  offered it for sin, as the first.
he presented the burnt offering,  offered it according to the ordinance.
he presented the meal offering,  filled his hand from it,  burnt it upon the altar, besides the burnt offering of the morning.
He also killed the ox and the ram, the sacrifice of peace offerings, which was for the people. And Aaron's sons delivered to him the blood, which he sprinkled upon the altar round about,
the fat of the ox and of the ram, the fat tail,  that which covers the innards,  the kidneys,  the caul of the liver.
they put the fat upon the breasts,  he burnt the fat upon the altar.
the breasts and the right thigh Aaron waved for a wave offering before Jehovah, as Moses commanded.
Aaron lifted up his hands toward the people,  blessed them. And he came down from offering the sin offering,  the burnt offering,  the peace offerings.
Moses and Aaron went into the tent of meeting,  came out,  blessed the people. And the glory of Jehovah appeared to all the people.
there came forth fire from before Jehovah,  consumed the burnt offering and the fat upon the altar. And when all the people saw it, they shouted,  fell on their faces.
Nadab and Abihu, the sons of Aaron, each of them took his censer,  put fire in it,  laid incense on it,  offered strange fire before Jehovah, which he had not commanded them.
there came forth fire from before Jehovah,  devoured them,  they died before Jehovah.
Then Moses said to Aaron, This is it that Jehovah spoke, saying, I will be sanctified in those who come near me. And I will be glorified before all the people. And Aaron remained silent.
Moses called Mishael and Elzaphan, the sons of Uzziel the uncle of Aaron,  said to them, Draw near. Carry your brothers from before the sanctuary out of the camp.
So they drew near,  carried them in their tunics out of the camp, as Moses had said.
Moses said to Aaron,  to Eleazar and to Ithamar, his sons, Let not the hair of your heads go loose, neither tear your clothes, that ye not die,  that he not be angry with all the congregation,  let your brothers, the whole house of Israel, bewail the burning which Jehovah has kindled.
ye shall not go out from the door of the tent of meeting, lest ye die, for the anointing oil of Jehovah is upon you. And they did according to the word of Moses.
Jehovah spoke to Aaron, saying,
Drink no wine nor strong drink, thou, nor thy sons with thee, when ye go into the tent of meeting, that ye not die-it shall be a statute forever throughout your generations-
that ye may make a distinction between the holy and the common,  between the unclean and the clean,
that ye may teach the sons of Israel all the statutes which Jehovah has spoken to them by Moses.
Moses spoke to Aaron,  to Eleazar and to Ithamar, his sons who were left, Take the meal offering that remains of the offerings of Jehovah made by fire,  eat it without leaven beside the altar, for it is most holy.
ye shall eat it in a holy place, because it is thy portion,  thy sons' portion, of the offerings of Jehovah made by fire. For so I am commanded.
ye shall eat the wave-breast and the heave-thigh in a clean place, thou,  thy sons,  thy daughters with thee. For they are given as thy portion,  thy sons' portion, out of the sacrifices of the peace offerings of the sons of Israel.
They shall bring the heave-thigh and the wave-breast with the offerings made by fire of the fat, to wave it for a wave offering before Jehovah,  it shall be thine,  thy sons' with thee, as a portion forever, as Jehovah has commanded.
Moses diligently sought the goat of the sin offering, , behold, it was burnt. And he was angry with Eleazar and with Ithamar, the sons of Aaron who were left, saying,
Why have ye not eaten the sin offering in the place of the sanctuary, seeing it is most holy,  he has given it to you to bear the iniquity of the congregation, to make atonement for them before Jehovah?
Behold, the blood of it was not brought into the sanctuary inside. Ye should certainly have eaten it in the sanctuary, as I commanded.
Aaron spoke to Moses, Behold, this day they have offered their sin offering and their burnt offering before Jehovah,  there have befallen me such things as these. And if I had eaten the sin offering today, would it have been well-pleasing in the sight of Jehovah?
when Moses heard, it was well-pleasing in his sight.
Jehovah spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying to them,
Speak to the sons of Israel, saying, These are the living things which ye may eat among all the beasts that are on the earth.
Whatever parts the hoof,  is cloven footed,  chews the cud, among the beasts, that may ye eat.
Nevertheless these shall ye not eat of those that chew the cud, or of those that part the hoof: the camel, because he chews the cud but does not part the hoof, he is unclean to you.
the coney, because he chews the cud but does not part the hoof, he is unclean to you.
the hare, because she chews the cud but does not part the hoof, she is unclean to you.
the swine, because he parts the hoof,  is cloven footed,  does not chew the cud, he is unclean to you.
Of their flesh ye shall not eat,  their carcasses ye shall not touch, they are unclean to you.
These may ye eat of all that are in the waters: whatever has fins and scales in the waters, in the seas,  in the rivers, that may ye eat.
all that have no fins and scales in the seas,  in the rivers, of all that move in the waters,  of all the living creatures that are in the waters, they are an abomination to you,
they shall be an abomination to you. Ye shall not eat of their flesh,  their carcasses ye shall have in abomination.
Whatever has no fins nor scales in the waters, that is an abomination to you.
these ye shall have in abomination among the birds, they shall not be eaten, they are an abomination: the eagle,  the vulture,  the osprey,
the kite,  the falcon after its kind,
every raven after its kind,
the ostrich,  the night-hawk,  the sea-gull,  the hawk after its kind,
the little owl,  the cormorant,  the great owl,
the horned owl,  the pelican,  the carrion vulture,
the stork, the heron after its kind,  the hoopoe,  the bat.
All winged creeping things that go upon all fours are an abomination to you.
Yet these ye may eat of all winged creeping things that go upon all fours, which have legs above their feet, with which to leap upon the earth,
even these of them ye may eat: the locust after its kind,  the bald locust after its kind,  the cricket after its kind,  the grasshopper after its kind.
But all winged creeping things, which have four feet, are an abomination to you,
by these ye shall become unclean. Whoever touches the carcass of them shall be unclean until the evening.
whoever bears any of the carcass of them shall wash his clothes,  be unclean until the evening.
Every beast which parts the hoof,  is not cloven footed, nor chews the cud, is unclean to you. Everyone who touches them shall be unclean.
whatever goes upon its paws, among all beasts that go on all fours, they are unclean to you. Whoever touches their carcass shall be unclean until the evening.
he who bears the carcass of them shall wash his clothes,  be unclean until the evening; they are unclean to you.
these are those which are unclean to you among the creeping things that creep upon the earth: the weasel,  the mouse,  the great lizard after its kind,
the gecko,  the land-crocodile,  the lizard,  the sand-lizard,  the chameleon.
These are those which are unclean to you among all that creep. Whoever touches them, when they are dead, shall be unclean until the evening.
upon whatever any of them falls when they are dead, it shall be unclean, whether it be any vessel of wood, or raiment, or skin, or sack. Whatever vessel it be, with which any work is done, it must be put into water,  it shall be unclean until the evening, then it shall be clean.
every earthen vessel, into which any of them falls, whatever is in it shall be unclean,  ye shall break it.
All food therein which may be eaten, that on which water comes, shall be unclean,  all drink that may be drunk in every such vessel shall be unclean.
everything upon which any part of their carcass falls shall be unclean, whether oven, or range for pots, it shall be broken in pieces; they are unclean,  shall be unclean to you.
Nevertheless a fountain or a pit in which is a gathering of water shall be clean,  that which touches their carcass shall be unclean.
if any of their carcass falls upon any sowing seed which is to be sown, it is clean.
But if water is put upon the seed,  any of their carcass falls in it, it is unclean to you.
if any beast, of which ye may eat, dies, he who touches the carcass of it shall be unclean until the evening.
he who eats of the carcass of it shall wash his clothes,  be unclean until the evening. He also who bears the carcass of it shall wash his clothes,  be unclean until the evening.
every creeping thing that creeps upon the earth is an abomination; it shall not be eaten.
Whatever goes upon the belly,  whatever goes upon all fours, or whatever has many feet, even all creeping things that creep upon the earth, them ye shall not eat, for they are an abomination.
Ye shall not make yourselves abominable with any creeping thing that creeps, nor shall ye make yourselves unclean with them, that ye should be defiled by it.
For I am Jehovah your God. Sanctify yourselves therefore,  become ye holy, since I am holy. Neither shall ye defile yourselves with any manner of creeping thing that moves upon the earth.
For I am Jehovah who brought you up out of the land of Egypt, to be your God. Ye shall therefore be holy, for I am holy.
This is the law of the beast,  of the bird,  of every living creature that moves in the waters,  of every creature that creeps upon the earth,
to make a distinction between the unclean and the clean,  between the living thing that may be eaten and the living thing that may not be eaten.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel, saying, If a woman conceives seed,  bears a man-child, then she shall be unclean seven days, as in the days of the impurity of her sickness she shall be unclean.
in the eighth day the flesh of his foreskin shall be circumcised.
she shall continue in the blood of her purifying thirty-three days. She shall touch no hallowed thing, nor come into the sanctuary, until the days of her purifying be fulfilled.
But if she bears a maid-child, then she shall be unclean two weeks, as in her impurity,  she shall continue in the blood of her purifying sixty-six days.
when the days of her purifying are fulfilled, for a son, or for a daughter, she shall bring a lamb a year old for a burnt offering,  a young pigeon, or a turtle-dove, for a sin offering, to the door of the tent of meeting, to the priest.
he shall offer it before Jehovah,  make atonement for her,  she shall be cleansed from the fountain of her blood. This is the law for her who bears, whether a male or a female.
if her means are not sufficient for a lamb, then she shall take two turtle-doves, or two young pigeons, the one for a burnt offering,  the other for a sin offering. And the priest shall make atonement for her,  she shall be clean.
Jehovah spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying,
When a man shall have in the skin of his flesh a rising, or a scab, or a bright spot,  it becomes in the skin of his flesh a leprous disease, then he shall be brought to Aaron the priest, or to one of his sons the priests.
the priest shall look on the disease in the skin of the flesh,  if the hair in the disease has turned white,  the appearance of the disease is deeper than the skin of his flesh, it is a leprous disease. And the priest shall look on him,  pronounce him unclean.
if the bright spot is white in the skin of his flesh,  the appearance of it is not deeper than the skin,  the hair of it has not turned white, then the priest shall shut up the disease seven days.
the priest shall look on him the seventh day, , behold, if in his eyes the disease is arrested,  the disease is not spread in the skin, then the priest shall shut him up seven days more.
the priest shall look on him again the seventh day, , behold, if the disease is dim,  the disease has not spread in the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him clean. It is a scab,  he shall wash his clothes,  be clean.
But if the scab spreads abroad in the skin after he has shown himself to the priest for his cleansing, he shall show himself to the priest again.
the priest shall look, , behold, if the scab is spread in the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him unclean. It is a leprous disease.
When the leprous disease is in a man, then he shall be brought to the priest.
the priest shall look, , behold, if there is a white rising in the skin,  it has turned the hair white,  there is quick raw flesh in the rising,
it is an old leprous disease in the skin of his flesh,  the priest shall pronounce him unclean. He shall not shut him up, for he is unclean.
if the leprous disease breaks out abroad in the skin,  the leprous disease covers all the skin of the disease from his head even to his feet, as far as appears to the priest,
then the priest shall look. And, behold, if the leprous disease has covered all his flesh, he shall pronounce him clean of the disease. It is all turned white; he is clean.
But whenever raw flesh appears in him, he shall be unclean.
the priest shall look on the raw flesh,  pronounce him unclean. The raw flesh is unclean; it is a leprous disease.
Or if the raw flesh turns again,  is changed to white, then he shall come to the priest.
the priest shall look on him, , behold, if the disease is turned into white, then the priest shall pronounce him clean of the disease; he is clean.
when the flesh has a boil in the skin of it,  it is healed,
in the place of the boil there is a white rising, or a bright spot, reddish-white, then it shall be shown to the priest.
the priest shall look, , behold, if the appearance of it is deeper than the skin,  the hair of it has turned white, then the priest shall pronounce him unclean. It is a leprous disease; it has broken out in the boil.
But if the priest looks on it, , behold, there are no white hairs in it,  it is not deeper than the skin,  is dim, then the priest shall shut him up seven days.
if it spreads abroad in the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him unclean; it is a disease.
But if the bright spot stays in its place,  has not spread, it is the scar of the boil,  the priest shall pronounce him clean.
Or when the flesh has a burning by fire in the skin of it,  the quick of the burning become a bright spot, reddish-white, or white,
then the priest shall look upon it. And, behold, if the hair in the bright spot has turned white,  the appearance of it is deeper than the skin, it is a leprous disease. It has broken out in the burning,  the priest shall pronounce him unclean; it is a leprous disease.
But if the priest looks on it, , behold, there is no white hair in the bright spot,  it is no deeper than the skin,  is dim, then the priest shall shut him up seven days.
the priest shall look upon him the seventh day. If it spread abroad in the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him unclean; it is a leprous disease.
if the bright spot stays in its place,  has not spread in the skin,  is dim, it is the rising of the burning,  the priest shall pronounce him clean, for it is the scar of the burning.
when a man or woman has a disease upon the head or upon the beard,
then the priest shall look on the disease. And, behold, if the appearance of it is deeper than the skin,  there is yellow thin hair in it, then the priest shall pronounce him unclean; it is a scall. It is a leprous disease of the head or of the beard.
if the priest looks on the disease of the scall, , behold, the appearance of it is not deeper than the skin,  there is no black hair in it, then the priest shall shut up the disease of the scall seven days.
in the seventh day the priest shall look on the disease, , behold, if the scall has not spread,  there is in it no yellow hair,  the appearance of the scall is not deeper than the skin,
then he shall be shaven,  the scall he shall not shave,  the priest shall shut up him who has the scall seven days more.
in the seventh day the priest shall look on the scall, , behold, if the scall has not spread in the skin,  the appearance of it is not deeper than the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him clean. And he shall wash his clothes,  be clean.
But if the scall spreads abroad in the skin after his cleansing,
then the priest shall look on him. And, behold, if the scall has spread in the skin, the priest shall not seek for the yellow hair, he is unclean.
But if in his eyes the scall is arrested,  black hair is grown up in it, the scall is healed. He is clean,  the priest shall pronounce him clean.
when a man or a woman has bright spots in the skin of the flesh, even white bright spots,
then the priest shall look. And, behold, if the bright spots in the skin of their flesh are of a dull white, it is a tetter. It has broken out in the skin; he is clean.
if a man's hair is fallen off his head, he is bald; he is clean.
if his hair is fallen off from the front part of his head, he is forehead bald; he is clean.
But if there is a reddish-white disease in the bald head, or the bald forehead, it is a leprous disease breaking out in his bald head, or his bald forehead.
Then the priest shall look upon him, , behold, if the rising of the disease is reddish-white in his bald head, or in his bald forehead, as the appearance of a leprous disease in the skin of the flesh,
he is a leprous man; he is unclean. The priest shall surely pronounce him unclean; his disease is on his head.
the man with a leprous disease in whom the disease is, his clothes shall be torn,  the hair of his head shall go loose,  he shall cover his upper lip,  shall cry, Unclean, unclean.
All the days in which the disease is in him he shall be unclean; he is unclean. He shall dwell alone; his dwelling shall be outside the camp.
The garment also that a leprous disease is in, whether it be a woolen garment, or a linen garment,
whether it be in warp, or woof, of linen, or of woolen, whether in a skin, or in anything made of skin,
if the disease is greenish or reddish in the garment, or in the skin, or in the warp, or in the woof, or in anything of skin, it is a leprous disease,  shall be shown to the priest.
the priest shall look upon the disease,  shut up the disease seven days.
he shall look on the disease on the seventh day. If the disease has spread in the garment, either in the warp, or in the woof, or in the skin, whatever service skin is used for, the disease is a fretting leprosy, it is unclean.
he shall burn the garment, whether the warp or the woof, in woolen or in linen, or anything of skin, in which the disease is, for it is a fretting leprosy. It shall be burnt in the fire.
if the priest shall look, , behold, the disease has not spread in the garment, either in the warp, or in the woof, or in anything of skin,
then the priest shall command that they wash the thing in which the disease is,  he shall shut it up seven more days.
the priest shall look, after the disease is washed, , behold, if the disease has not changed its color,  the disease has not spread, it is unclean. Thou shall burn it in the fire. It is a fret, whether the bareness be inside or outside.
if the priest looks, , behold, the disease is dim after the washing of it, then he shall tear it out of the garment, or out of the skin, or out of the warp, or out of the woof.
if it still appears in the garment, either in the warp, or in the woof, or in anything of skin, it is breaking out. Thou shall burn that in which the disease is with fire.
the garment, either the warp, or the woof, or whatever thing of skin it be, which thou shall wash, if the disease has departed from them, then it shall be washed the second time,  shall be clean.
This is the law of a leprous disease in a garment of woolen or linen, either in the warp, or the woof, or anything of skin, to pronounce it clean, or to pronounce it unclean.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
This shall be the law of the man with a leprous disease in the day of his cleansing: He shall be brought to the priest,
the priest shall go forth out of the camp. And the priest shall look, , behold, if a leprous disease be healed in the man with a leprous disease,
then the priest shall command to take two living clean birds,  cedar wood,  scarlet,  hyssop for him who is to be cleansed.
the priest shall command to kill one of the birds in an earthen vessel over running water.
As for the living bird, he shall take it,  the cedar wood,  the scarlet,  the hyssop,  shall dip them and the living bird in the blood of the bird that was killed over the running water.
he shall sprinkle seven times upon him who is to be cleansed from the leprous disease,  shall pronounce him clean,  shall let the living bird go into the open field.
he who is to be cleansed shall wash his clothes,  shave off all his hair,  bathe himself in water,  he shall be clean. And after that he shall come into the camp,  shall dwell outside his tent seven days.
it shall be on the seventh day, that he shall shave all his hair off his head and his beard and his eyebrows, even all his hair he shall shave off. And he shall wash his clothes,  he shall bathe his flesh in water,  he shall be clean.
on the eighth day he shall take two he-lambs without blemish,  one ewe-lamb a year old without blemish,  three tenth parts of an ephah of fine flour for a meal offering, mingled with oil,  one log of oil.
the priest who cleanses him shall set the man who is to be cleansed,  those things, before Jehovah, at the door of the tent of meeting.
the priest shall take one of the he-lambs,  offer him for a trespass offering,  the log of oil,  wave them for a wave offering before Jehovah.
he shall kill the he-lamb in the place where they kill the sin offering and the burnt offering, in the place of the sanctuary. For as the sin offering is the priest's, so is the trespass offering; it is most holy.
the priest shall take of the blood of the trespass offering,  the priest shall put it upon the tip of the right ear of him who is to be cleansed,  upon the thumb of his right hand,  upon the great toe of his right foot.
the priest shall take of the log of oil,  pour it into the palm of his own left hand.
the priest shall dip his right finger in the oil that is in his left hand,  shall sprinkle of the oil with his finger seven times before Jehovah.
of the rest of the oil that is in his hand the priest shall put upon the tip of the right ear of him who is to be cleansed,  upon the thumb of his right hand,  upon the great toe of his right foot, upon the blood of the trespass offering.
the rest of the oil that is in the priest's hand he shall put upon the head of him who is to be cleansed,  the priest shall make atonement for him before Jehovah.
the priest shall offer the sin offering,  make atonement for him who is to be cleansed because of his uncleanness,  afterward he shall kill the burnt offering.
the priest shall offer the burnt offering and the meal offering upon the altar,  the priest shall make atonement for him,  he shall be clean.
if he is poor,  cannot get so much, then he shall take one he-lamb for a trespass offering to be waved, to make atonement for him,  one tenth part of an ephah of fine flour mingled with oil for a meal offering,  a log of oil,
two turtle-doves, or two young pigeons, such as he is able to get,  the one shall be a sin offering,  the other a burnt offering.
on the eighth day he shall bring them for his cleansing to the priest, to the door of the tent of meeting, before Jehovah.
the priest shall take the lamb of the trespass offering,  the log of oil,  the priest shall wave them for a wave offering before Jehovah.
he shall kill the lamb of the trespass offering. And the priest shall take of the blood of the trespass offering,  put it upon the tip of the right ear of him who is to be cleansed,  upon the thumb of his right hand,  upon the great toe of his right foot.
the priest shall pour of the oil into the palm of his own left hand.
the priest shall sprinkle with his right finger some of the oil that is in his left hand seven times before Jehovah.
the priest shall put of the oil that is in his hand upon the tip of the right ear of him who is to be cleansed,  upon the thumb of his right hand,  upon the great toe of his right foot, upon the place of the blood of the trespass offering.
the rest of the oil that is in the priest's hand he shall put upon the head of him who is to be cleansed, to make atonement for him before Jehovah.
he shall offer one of the turtle-doves, or of the young pigeons, such as he is able to get,
even such as he is able to get, the one for a sin offering,  the other for a burnt offering, with the meal offering,  the priest shall make atonement for him who is to be cleansed before Jehovah.
This is the law of him in whom is a leprous disease, who is not able to get what pertains to his cleansing.
Jehovah spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying,
When ye have come into the land of Canaan, which I give to you for a possession,  I put a leprous disease in a house of the land of your possession,
then he who owns the house shall come and tell the priest, saying, There seems to me to be as it were a disease in the house.
the priest shall command that they empty the house before the priest goes in to see the disease, that all that is in the house not be made unclean. And afterward the priest shall go in to see the house,
he shall look on the disease. And, behold, if the disease is in the walls of the house with hollow streaks, greenish or reddish,  the appearance of it is deeper than the wall surface,
then the priest shall go out of the house to the door of the house,  shut up the house seven days.
the priest shall come again the seventh day,  shall look. And, behold, if the disease has spread in the walls of the house,
then the priest shall command that they take out the stones in which the disease is,  cast them into an unclean place outside the city.
he shall cause the house to be scraped inside round about,  they shall pour out the mortar, that they scrape off, outside the city into an unclean place.
they shall take other stones,  put them in the place of those stones. And he shall take other mortar,  shall plaster the house.
if the disease comes again,  breaks out in the house, after he has taken out the stones,  after he has scraped the house,  after it is plastered,
then the priest shall come in and look. And, behold, if the disease has spread in the house, it is a fretting leprosy in the house; it is unclean.
he shall break down the house, the stones of it,  the timber of it,  all the mortar of the house,  he shall carry them forth out of the city into an unclean place.
Moreover he who goes into the house all the while that it is shut up shall be unclean until the evening.
he who lies in the house shall wash his clothes. And he who eats in the house shall wash his clothes.
if the priest shall come in,  look, , behold, the disease has not spread in the house after the house was plastered, then the priest shall pronounce the house clean, because the disease is healed.
he shall take two birds,  cedar wood,  scarlet,  hyssop to cleanse the house.
he shall kill one of the birds in an earthen vessel over running water.
he shall take the cedar wood,  the hyssop,  the scarlet,  the living bird,  dip them in the blood of the slain bird,  in the running water,  sprinkle the house seven times.
he shall cleanse the house with the blood of the bird,  with the running water,  with the living bird,  with the cedar wood,  with the hyssop,  with the scarlet,
but he shall let the living bird go out of the city into the open field. So he shall make atonement for the house,  it shall be clean.
This is the law for all manner of a leprous disease,  for a scall,
for a leprous disease of a garment,  for a house,
for a rising,  for a scab,  for a bright spot,
to teach when it is unclean,  when it is clean. This is the law of a leprous disease.
Jehovah spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel,  say to them, When any man has an issue out of his flesh, he is unclean because of his issue.
this shall be his uncleanness in his issue, whether his flesh runs with his issue, or his flesh has stopped from his issue, it is his uncleanness.
Every bed on which he who has the issue lies shall be unclean,  everything on which he sits shall be unclean.
whoever touches his bed shall wash his clothes,  bathe himself in water,  be unclean until the evening.
he who sits on anything on which he who has the issue sat shall wash his clothes,  bathe himself in water,  be unclean until the evening.
he who touches the flesh of him who has the issue shall wash his clothes,  bathe himself in water,  be unclean until the evening.
if he who has the issue spits upon him who is clean, then he shall wash his clothes,  bathe himself in water,  be unclean until the evening.
whatever saddle he who has the issue rides upon shall be unclean.
whoever touches anything that was under him shall be unclean until the evening. And he who bears those things shall wash his clothes,  bathe himself in water,  be unclean until the evening.
whomever he who has the issue touches, without having rinsed his hands in water, he shall wash his clothes,  bathe himself in water,  be unclean until the evening.
the earthen vessel, which he who has the issue touches, shall be broken,  every vessel of wood shall be rinsed in water.
when he who has an issue is cleansed of his issue, then he shall number to himself seven days for his cleansing,  wash his clothes,  he shall bathe his flesh in running water,  shall be clean.
on the eighth day he shall take to him two turtle-doves, or two young pigeons,  come before Jehovah to the door of the tent of meeting,  give them to the priest.
the priest shall offer them, the one for a sin offering,  the other for a burnt offering,  the priest shall make atonement for him before Jehovah for his issue.
if any man's seed of copulation go out from him, then he shall bathe all his flesh in water,  be unclean until the evening.
every garment,  every skin, on which is the seed of copulation, shall be washed with water,  be unclean until the evening.
The woman also with whom a man shall lie with seed of copulation, they shall both bathe themselves in water,  be unclean until the evening.
if a woman has an issue,  her issue in her flesh is blood, she shall be seven days in her impurity,  whoever touches her shall be unclean until the evening.
everything that she lies upon in her impurity shall be unclean. Also everything that she sits upon shall be unclean.
whoever touches her bed shall wash his clothes,  bathe himself in water,  be unclean until the evening.
whoever touches anything that she sits upon shall wash his clothes,  bathe himself in water,  be unclean until the evening.
if it be on the bed, or on anything on which she sits, when he touches it, he shall be unclean until the evening.
if any man lies with her,  her impurity be upon him, he shall be unclean seven days,  every bed on which he lies shall be unclean.
if a woman has an issue of her blood many days not in the time of her impurity, or if she has an issue beyond the time of her impurity, she shall be all the days of the issue of her uncleanness as in the days of her impurity; she is unclean.
Every bed on which she lies all the days of her issue shall be to her as the bed of her impurity,  everything on which she sits shall be unclean, as the uncleanness of her impurity.
whoever touches those things shall be unclean,  shall wash his clothes,  bathe himself in water,  be unclean until the evening.
But if she is cleansed of her issue, then she shall number to herself seven days,  after that she shall be clean.
on the eighth day she shall take to her two turtle-doves, or two young pigeons,  bring them to the priest, to the door of the tent of meeting.
the priest shall offer the one for a sin offering,  the other for a burnt offering,  the priest shall make atonement for her before Jehovah for the issue of her uncleanness.
Thus ye shall separate the sons of Israel from their uncleanness, that they not die in their uncleanness when they defile my tabernacle that is in the midst of them.
This is the law of him who has an issue,  of him whose seed of copulation goes from him, so that he is unclean thereby,
of her who is sick with her impurity,  of him who has an issue, of the man,  of the woman,  of him who lies with her who is unclean.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, after the death of the two sons of Aaron, when they drew near before Jehovah,  died,
Jehovah said to Moses, Speak to Aaron thy brother, that he not come at all times into the holy place within the veil, before the mercy-seat which is upon the ark, that he not die, for I will appear in the cloud upon the mercy-seat.
Aaron shall come into the holy place this way: with a young bullock for a sin offering,  a ram for a burnt offering.
He shall put on the holy linen tunic,  he shall have the linen breeches upon his flesh,  shall be girded with the linen sash,  he shall be attired with the linen miter. They are the holy garments,  he shall bathe his flesh in water,  put them on.
he shall take from the congregation of the sons of Israel two he-goats for a sin offering,  one ram for a burnt offering.
Aaron shall present the bullock of the sin offering, which is for himself,  make atonement for himself,  for his house.
he shall take the two goats,  set them before Jehovah at the door of the tent of meeting.
Aaron shall cast lots upon the two goats, one lot for Jehovah,  the other lot for the scapegoat.
Aaron shall present the goat upon which the lot fell for Jehovah,  offer him for a sin offering.
But the goat, on which the lot fell for the scapegoat, shall be set alive before Jehovah, to make atonement for him, to send him away for the scapegoat into the wilderness.
Aaron shall present the bullock of the sin offering, which is for himself,  shall make atonement for himself,  for his house,  shall kill the bullock of the sin offering which is for himself.
he shall take a censer full of coals of fire from off the altar before Jehovah,  his hands full of sweet incense beaten small,  bring it within the veil.
he shall put the incense upon the fire before Jehovah, that the cloud of the incense may cover the mercy-seat that is upon the testimony, that he not die.
he shall take of the blood of the bullock,  sprinkle it with his finger upon the mercy-seat on the east. And he shall sprinkle of the blood with his finger seven times before the mercy-seat.
Then he shall kill the goat of the sin offering, that is for the people,  bring his blood within the veil,  do with his blood as he did with the blood of the bullock,  sprinkle it upon the mercy-seat,  before the mercy-seat.
he shall make atonement for the holy place, because of the uncleannesses of the sons of Israel,  because of their transgressions, even all their sins. And so he shall do for the tent of meeting that dwells with them in the midst of their uncleannesses.
there shall be no man in the tent of meeting when he goes in to make atonement in the holy place until he comes out,  has made atonement for himself,  for his household,  for all the assembly of Israel.
he shall go out to the altar that is before Jehovah,  make atonement for it. And shall take of the blood of the bullock,  of the blood of the goat,  put it upon the horns of the altar round about.
he shall sprinkle of the blood upon it with his finger seven times,  cleanse it,  hallow it from the uncleannesses of the sons of Israel.
when he has made an end of atoning for the holy place,  the tent of meeting,  the altar, he shall present the live goat.
Aaron shall lay both his hands upon the head of the live goat,  confess over him all the iniquities of the sons of Israel,  all their transgressions, even all their sins. And he shall put them upon the head of the goat,  shall send him away by the hand of a man who is in readiness into the wilderness.
the goat shall bear upon him all their iniquities to a solitary land. And he shall let the goat go in the wilderness.
Aaron shall come into the tent of meeting,  shall put off the linen garments, which he put on when he went into the holy place,  shall leave them there.
he shall bathe his flesh in water in a holy place,  put on his garments,  come forth,  offer his burnt offering and the burnt offering of the people,  make atonement for himself and for the people.
he shall burn upon the altar the fat of the sin offering.
he who lets the goat go for the scapegoat shall wash his clothes,  bathe his flesh in water,  afterward he shall come into the camp.
the bullock of the sin offering,  the goat of the sin offering, whose blood was brought in to make atonement in the holy place, shall be carried forth outside the camp,  they shall burn in the fire their skins,  their flesh,  their dung.
he who burns them shall wash his clothes,  bathe his flesh in water,  afterward he shall come into the camp.
it shall be a statute forever to you. In the seventh month, on the tenth day of the month, ye shall afflict your souls,  shall do no manner of work, the home-born, or the stranger who sojourns among you.
For on this day atonement shall be made for you, to cleanse you. Ye shall be clean from all your sins before Jehovah.
It is a sabbath of solemn rest to you,  ye shall afflict your souls. It is a statute forever.
the priest, who shall be anointed and who shall be consecrated to be priest in his father's stead, shall make the atonement. And he shall put on the linen garments, even the holy garments,
shall make atonement for the holy sanctuary,  he shall make atonement for the tent of meeting and for the altar,  he shall make atonement for the priests and for all the people of the assembly.
this shall be an everlasting statute to you, to make atonement for the sons of Israel because of all their sins once in the year. And he did as Jehovah commanded Moses.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to Aaron,  to his sons,  to all the sons of Israel,  say to them, This is the thing which Jehovah has commanded, saying,
Whatever man there is of the house of Israel, who kills an ox, or lamb, or goat, in the camp, or who kills it outside the camp,
has not brought it to the door of the tent of meeting, to offer it as an oblation to Jehovah before the tabernacle of Jehovah, blood shall be imputed to that man. He has shed blood,  that man shall be cut off from among his people,
to the end that the sons of Israel may bring their sacrifices, which they sacrifice in the open field, even that they may bring them to Jehovah, to the door of the tent of meeting, to the priest,  sacrifice them for sacrifices of peace offerings to Jehovah.
the priest shall sprinkle the blood upon the altar of Jehovah at the door of the tent of meeting,  burn the fat for a sweet savor to Jehovah.
they shall no more sacrifice their sacrifices to the he-goats, after which they play the harlot. This shall be a statute forever to them throughout their generations.
thou shall say to them, Whatever man there is of the house of Israel, or of the strangers that sojourn among them, who offers a burnt offering or sacrifice,
does not bring it to the door of the tent of meeting, to sacrifice it to Jehovah, that man shall be cut off from his people.
whatever man there is of the house of Israel, or of the strangers that sojourn among them, who eats any manner of blood, I will set my face against that soul who eats blood,  will cut him off from among his people.
For the life of the flesh is in the blood,  I have given it to you upon the altar to make atonement for your souls, for it is the blood that makes atonement by reason of the life.
Therefore I said to the sons of Israel, No soul of you shall eat blood, nor shall any stranger that sojourns among you eat blood.
whatever man there is of the sons of Israel, or of the strangers that sojourn among them, who takes any beast or bird in hunting that may be eaten, he shall pour out the blood of it,  cover it with dust.
For as to the life of all flesh, the blood of it is with the life of it. Therefore I said to the sons of Israel, Ye shall eat the blood of no manner of flesh, for the life of all flesh is the blood of it. Whoever eats it shall be cut off.
every soul who eats that which dies of itself, or that which is torn of beasts, whether he be home-born or a sojourner, he shall wash his clothes,  bathe himself in water,  be unclean until the evening, then he shall be clean.
But if he does not wash them, nor bathe his flesh, then he shall bear his iniquity.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel,  say to them, I am Jehovah your God.
Ye shall not do after the doings of the land of Egypt, in which ye dwelt,  ye shall not do after the doings of the land of Canaan, where I bring you, nor shall ye walk in their statutes.
Ye shall do my ordinances,  ye shall keep my statutes, to walk therein. I am Jehovah your God.
Ye shall therefore keep my statutes,  my ordinances, which if a man does, he shall live in them. I am Jehovah.
None of you shall approach to any who are near of kin to him, to uncover nakedness. I am Jehovah.
The nakedness of thy father, even the nakedness of thy mother, thou shall not uncover. She is thy mother. Thou shall not uncover her nakedness,
the nakedness of thy father's wife. It is thy father's nakedness.
The nakedness of thy sister, the daughter of thy father, or the daughter of thy mother, whether born at home, or born abroad, even their nakedness thou shall not uncover.
The nakedness of thy son's daughter, or of thy daughter's daughter, even their nakedness thou shall not uncover, for theirs is thine own nakedness.
The nakedness of thy father's wife's daughter, begotten of thy father, she is thy sister, thou shall not uncover her nakedness.
Thou shall not uncover the nakedness of thy father's sister. She is thy father's near kinswoman.
Thou shall not uncover the nakedness of thy mother's sister, for she is thy mother's near kinswoman.
Thou shall not uncover the nakedness of thy father's brother. Thou shall not approach to his wife. She is thine aunt.
Thou shall not uncover the nakedness of thy daughter-in-law. She is thy son's wife. Thou shall not uncover her nakedness.
Thou shall not uncover the nakedness of thy brother's wife. It is thy brother's nakedness.
Thou shall not uncover the nakedness of a woman and her daughter. Thou shall not take her son's daughter, or her daughter's daughter, to uncover her nakedness. They are near kinswomen. It is iniquity.
thou shall not take a wife in addition to her sister, to be a rival to her, to uncover her nakedness, besides the other in her life-time.
thou shall not approach to a woman to uncover her nakedness, as long as she is impure by her uncleanness.
thou shall not lie carnally with thy neighbor's wife, to defile thyself with her.
thou shall not give any of thy seed to make them pass through the fire to Molech, neither shall thou profane the name of thy God. I am Jehovah.
Thou shall not lie with mankind, as with womankind. It is abomination.
thou shall not lie with any beast to defile thyself with it, nor shall any woman stand before a beast, to lie down with it. It is a perversion.
Do not defile ye yourselves in any of these things. For in all these the nations are defiled which I cast out from before you,
the land is defiled. Therefore I visit the iniquity of it upon it,  the land vomits out its inhabitants.
Ye therefore shall keep my statutes and my ordinances,  shall not do any of these abominations, neither the home-born, nor the stranger that sojourns among you,
for all these abominations the men of the land have done, who were before you,  the land is defiled),
that the land not vomit you out also, when ye defile it, as it vomited out the nation that was before you.
For whoever shall do any of these abominations, even the souls that do them shall be cut off from among their people.
Therefore ye shall keep my charge, that ye not practice any of these abominable customs, which were practiced before you,  that ye not defile yourselves in it. I am Jehovah your God.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to all the congregation of the sons of Israel,  say to them, Ye shall be holy, for I Jehovah your God am holy.
Every man shall fear his mother and his father. And ye shall keep my sabbaths. I am Jehovah your God.
Turn ye not to idols, nor make to yourselves molten gods. I am Jehovah your God.
when ye offer a sacrifice of peace offerings to Jehovah, ye shall offer it that ye may be accepted.
It shall be eaten the same day ye offer it,  on the morrow. And if any remain until the third day, it shall be burnt with fire.
if it is eaten at all on the third day, it is an abomination. It shall not be accepted.
But he who eats it shall bear his iniquity, because he has profaned the holy thing of Jehovah,  that soul shall be cut off from his people.
when ye reap the harvest of your land, thou shall not wholly reap the corners of thy field, nor shall thou gather the gleaning of thy harvest.
thou shall not glean thy vineyard, nor shall thou gather the fallen fruit of thy vineyard. Thou shall leave them for the poor man and for the sojourner. I am Jehovah your God.
Ye shall not steal, nor shall ye deal falsely, nor lie one to another.
ye shall not swear by my name falsely,  profane the name of thy God. I am Jehovah.
Thou shall not oppress thy neighbor, nor rob him. The wages of a hired servant shall not abide with thee all night until the morning.
Thou shall not curse the deaf, nor put a stumbling block before the blind,  thou shall fear thy God. I am Jehovah.
Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment. Thou shall not respect the person of the poor man, nor honor the person of the mighty man,  thou shall judge thy neighbor in righteousness.
Thou shall not go up and down as a talebearer among thy people, neither shall thou stand against the blood of thy neighbor. I am Jehovah.
Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart. Thou shall surely rebuke thy neighbor,  not bear sin because of him.
Thou shall not take vengeance, nor bear any grudge against the sons of thy people,  thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself. I am Jehovah.
Ye shall keep my statutes. Thou shall not let thy cattle engender with a diverse kind. Thou shall not sow thy field with two kinds of seed, neither shall there come upon thee a garment of two kinds of stuff mingled together.
whoever lies carnally with a woman, who is a bondmaid, betrothed to a husband,  not at all redeemed, nor freedom given her, they shall be punished. They shall not be put to death, because she was not free.
he shall bring his trespass offering to Jehovah, to the door of the tent of meeting, even a ram for a trespass offering.
the priest shall make atonement for him with the ram of the trespass offering before Jehovah for his sin which he has sinned. And the sin which he has sinned shall be forgiven him.
when ye shall come into the land,  shall have planted all manner of trees for food, then ye shall count the fruit of it as their uncircumcision. Three years they shall be as uncircumcised to you; it shall not be eaten.
But in the fourth year all the fruit of it shall be holy, for giving praise to Jehovah.
in the fifth year ye shall eat of the fruit of it, that it may yield to you the increase of it. I am Jehovah your God.
Ye shall not eat anything with the blood. Neither shall ye use enchantments, nor practice augury.
Ye shall not round the corners of your heads, nor shall thou mar the corners of thy beard.
Ye shall not make any cuttings in your flesh for the dead, nor print any marks upon you. I am Jehovah.
Do not profane thy daughter, to make her a harlot, lest the land fall to whoredom,  the land become full of wickedness.
Ye shall keep my sabbaths,  reverence my sanctuary. I am Jehovah.
Do not turn to those who have familiar spirits, nor to the wizards. Do not seek them out, to be defiled by them. I am Jehovah your God.
Thou shall rise up before the hoary head,  honor the face of the old man,  thou shall fear thy God. I am Jehovah.
if a stranger sojourns with thee in your land, ye shall not do him wrong.
The stranger that sojourns with you shall be to you as the home-born among you,  thou shall love him as thyself, for ye were sojourners in the land of Egypt. I am Jehovah your God.
Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment, in measures of length, of weight, or of quantity.
Ye shall have just balances, just weights, a just ephah,  a just hin. I am Jehovah your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt.
ye shall observe all my statutes,  all my ordinances,  do them. I am Jehovah.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Moreover, thou shall say to the sons of Israel, Whoever he is of the sons of Israel, or of the strangers that sojourn in Israel, who gives of his seed to Molech, he shall surely be put to death. The people of the land shall stone him with stones.
I also will set my face against that man,  will cut him off from among his people, because he has given of his seed to Molech, to defile my sanctuary,  to profane my holy name.
if the people at the land do at all hide their eyes from that man, when he gives of his seed to Molech,  do not put him to death,
then I will set my face against that man,  against his family,  will cut him off,  all who play the harlot after him, to play the harlot with Molech, from among their people.
the soul that turns to those who have familiar spirits,  to the wizards, to play the harlot after them, I will even set my face against that soul,  will cut him off from among his people.
Sanctify yourselves therefore,  become ye holy, for I am Jehovah your God.
ye shall keep my statutes,  do them. I am Jehovah who sanctifies you.
For he who curses his father or his mother shall surely be put to death. He has cursed his father or his mother; his blood shall be upon him.
the man who commits adultery with another man's wife, even he who commits adultery with his neighbor's wife, the adulterer and the adulteress shall surely be put to death.
the man who lies with his father's wife has uncovered his father's nakedness. Both of them shall surely be put to death, their blood shall be upon them.
if a man lies with his daughter-in-law, both of them shall surely be put to death. They have wrought perversion. Their blood shall be upon them.
if a man lies with a man, as with a woman, both of them have committed abomination. They shall surely be put to death; their blood shall be upon them.
if a man takes a wife and her mother, it is wickedness. They shall be burnt with fire, both he and they, that there be no wickedness among you.
if a man lies with a beast, he shall surely be put to death,  ye shall kill the beast.
if a woman approaches to any beast,  lies down with it, thou shall kill the woman and the beast. They shall surely be put to death; their blood shall be upon them.
if a man shall take his sister, his father's daughter, or his mother's daughter,  see her nakedness,  she sees his nakedness, it is a shameful thing,  they shall be cut off in the sight of the sons of their people. He has uncovered his sister's nakedness; he shall bear his iniquity.
if a man shall lie with a woman having her sickness,  shall uncover her nakedness, he has made naked her fountain,  she has uncovered the fountain of her blood. And both of them shall be cut off from among their people.
thou shall not uncover the nakedness of thy mother's sister, nor of thy father's sister, for he has made naked his near kin. They shall bear their iniquity.
if a man shall lie with his uncle's wife, he has uncovered his uncle's nakedness. They shall bear their sin; they shall die childless.
if a man shall take his brother's wife, it is impurity. He has uncovered his brother's nakedness; they shall be childless.
Ye shall therefore keep all my statutes,  all my ordinances,  do them, that the land, where I bring you to dwell in it, not vomit you out.
ye shall not walk in the customs of the nation which I cast out before you, for they did all these things,  therefore I abhorred them.
But I have said to you, Ye shall inherit their land,  I will give it to you to possess it, a land flowing with milk and honey. I am Jehovah your God, who has separated you from the peoples.
Ye shall therefore make a distinction between the clean beast and the unclean,  between the unclean fowl and the clean. And ye shall not make your souls abominable by beast, or by bird, or by anything with which the ground teems, which I have separated from you as unclean.
ye shall be holy to me, for I, Jehovah, am holy,  have set you apart from the peoples, that ye should be mine.
A man or also a woman who has a familiar spirit, or that is a wizard, shall surely be put to death. They shall stone them with stones; their blood shall be upon them.
Jehovah said to Moses, Speak to the priests, the sons of Aaron,  say to them, There shall none defile himself for the dead among his people,
except for his kin, who is near to him: for his mother,  for his father,  for his son,  for his daughter,  for his brother.
for his sister a virgin, who is near to him, who has had no husband, for her he may defile himself.
He shall not defile himself, who is a chief man among his people, to profane himself.
They shall not make baldness upon their head, neither shall they shave off the corner of their beard, nor make any cuttings in their flesh.
They shall be holy to their God,  not profane the name of their God. For they offer the offerings of Jehovah made by fire, the bread of their God. Therefore they shall be holy.
They shall not take a woman who is a harlot, or profane, neither shall they take a woman put away from her husband, for he is holy to his God.
Thou shall sanctify him therefore, for he offers the bread of thy God. He shall be holy to thee, for I Jehovah, who sanctify you, am holy.
the daughter of any priest, if she profanes herself by playing the harlot, she profanes her father. She shall be burnt with fire.
he who is the high priest among his brothers, upon whose head the anointing oil is poured,  who is consecrated to put on the garments, shall not let the hair of his head go loose, nor tear his clothes,
neither shall he go in to any dead body, nor defile himself for his father, or for his mother,
neither shall he go out of the sanctuary, nor profane the sanctuary of his God, for the crown of the anointing oil of his God is upon him. I am Jehovah.
he shall take a wife in her virginity.
A widow, or one divorced, or a profane woman, a harlot, these he shall not take,  he shall take to wife a virgin of his own people.
he shall not profane his seed among his people, for I am Jehovah who sanctifies him.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to Aaron, saying, Whoever he is of thy seed throughout their generations who has a blemish, let him not approach to offer the bread of his God.
For whatever man he is who has a blemish, he shall not approach: not a blind man, or a lame man, or he who has a flat nose, or anything superfluous,
or a man who is broken-footed, or broken-handed,
or crook-backed, or a dwarf, or who has a blemish in his eye, or is scurvy, or scabbed, or has his testicles broken.
No man of the seed of Aaron the priest, who has a blemish, shall come near to offer the offerings of Jehovah made by fire; he has a blemish, he shall not come near to offer the bread of his God.
He shall eat the bread of his God, both of the most holy,  of the holy,
only he shall not go in to the veil, nor come near to the altar, because he has a blemish, that he not profane my sanctuaries, for I am Jehovah who sanctifies them.
So Moses spoke to Aaron,  to his sons,  to all the sons of Israel.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to Aaron and to his sons, that they separate themselves from the holy things of the sons of Israel, which they hallow to me,  that they not profane my holy name. I am Jehovah.
Say to them, Whoever he is of all your seed throughout your generations, that approaches to the holy things, which the sons of Israel hallow to Jehovah, having his uncleanness upon him, that soul shall be cut off from before me. I am Jehovah.
Whatever man of the seed of Aaron being a man with a leprous disease, or has an issue, he shall not eat of the holy things until he is clean. And whoever touches anything that is unclean by the dead, or a man whose seed goes from him,
or whoever touches any creeping thing, by which he may be made unclean, or a man of whom he may take uncleanness, whatever uncleanness he has,
the soul that touches any such shall be unclean until the evening. And shall not eat of the holy things unless he bathe his flesh in water.
when the sun is down, he shall be clean,  afterward he shall eat of the holy things, because it is his bread.
That which dies of itself, or is torn by beasts, he shall not eat to defile himself with it. I am Jehovah.
They shall therefore keep my charge, lest they bear sin for it,  die in it if they profane it. I am Jehovah who sanctifies them.
There shall no stranger eat of the holy thing. A sojourner of the priest's, or a hired servant, shall not eat of the holy thing.
But if a priest buys any soul, the purchase of his money, he shall eat of it,  such as are born in his house, they shall eat of his bread.
if a priest's daughter be married to a stranger, she shall not eat of the heave offering of the holy things.
But if a priest's daughter be a widow, or divorced,  have no child,  is returned to her father's house, as in her youth, she shall eat of her father's bread,  there shall no stranger eat of it.
if a man eats of the holy thing unwittingly, then he shall put the fifth part of it to it,  shall give the holy thing to the priest.
they shall not profane the holy things of the sons of Israel, which they offer to Jehovah,
so cause them to bear the iniquity that brings guilt when they eat their holy things, for I am Jehovah who sanctifies them.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to Aaron,  to his sons,  to all the sons of Israel,  say to them, Whoever he is of the house of Israel, or of the sojourners in Israel, who offers his oblation, whether it be any of their vows, or any of their freewill offerings, which they offer to Jehovah for a burnt offering,
that ye may be accepted, ye shall offer a male without blemish, of the bullocks, of the sheep, or of the goats.
But whatever has a blemish, that ye shall not offer, for it shall not be acceptable for you.
whoever offers a sacrifice of peace offerings to Jehovah to accomplish a vow, or for a freewill offering, of the herd or of the flock, it shall be perfect to be accepted; there shall be no blemish in it.
Blind, or broken, or maimed, or having a skin tumor, or scurvy, or scabbed, ye shall not offer these to Jehovah, nor make an offering by fire of them upon the altar to Jehovah.
Either a bullock or a lamb that has anything superfluous or lacking in his parts, that thou may offer for a freewill offering,  it shall not be accepted for a vow.
That which has its testicles bruised, or crushed, or broken, or cut, ye shall not offer to Jehovah, neither shall ye do thus in your land.
Neither from the hand of a foreigner shall ye offer the bread of your God of any of these, because their corruption is in them; there is a blemish in them. They shall not be accepted for you.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
When a bullock, or a sheep, or a goat, is brought forth, then it shall be seven days under the dam,  from the eighth day and after that it shall be accepted for the oblation of an offering made by fire to Jehovah.
whether it be cow or ewe, ye shall not kill it and its young both in one day.
when ye sacrifice a sacrifice of thanksgiving to Jehovah, ye shall sacrifice it that ye may be accepted.
It shall be eaten on the same day. Ye shall leave none of it until the morning. I am Jehovah.
Therefore ye shall keep my commandments,  do them. I am Jehovah.
ye shall not profane my holy name,  I will be hallowed among the sons of Israel. I am Jehovah who hallows you,
who brought you out of the land of Egypt, to be your God. I am Jehovah.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel,  say to them, The set feasts of Jehovah, which ye shall proclaim to be holy convocations, even these are my set feasts.
Six days shall work be done,  on the seventh day is a sabbath of solemn rest, a holy convocation. Ye shall do no manner of work. It is a sabbath to Jehovah in all your dwellings.
These are the set feasts of Jehovah, even holy convocations, which ye shall proclaim in their appointed season:
In the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month at evening, is Jehovah's Passover.
on the fifteenth day of the same month is the feast of unleavened bread to Jehovah. Ye shall eat unleavened bread seven days.
In the first day ye shall have a holy convocation. Ye shall do no job work.
But ye shall offer an offering made by fire to Jehovah seven days. In the seventh day is a holy convocation, ye shall do no job work.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel,  say to them, When ye have come into the land which I give to you,  shall reap the harvest of it, then ye shall bring the sheaf of the first-fruits of your harvest to the priest.
he shall wave the sheaf before Jehovah, to be accepted for you. On the morrow after the sabbath the priest shall wave it.
in the day when ye wave the sheaf, ye shall offer a he-lamb without blemish a year old for a burnt offering to Jehovah.
the meal offering of it shall be two tenth parts of an ephah of fine flour mingled with oil, an offering made by fire to Jehovah for a sweet savor. And the drink offering of it shall be of wine, the fourth part of a hin.
ye shall eat neither bread, nor parched grain, nor fresh ears, until this selfsame day, until ye have brought the oblation of your God. It is a statute forever throughout your generations in all your dwellings.
ye shall count to you from the morrow after the sabbath, from the day that ye brought the sheaf of the wave offering, there shall be complete seven sabbaths.
Ye shall number fifty days, even to the morrow after the seventh sabbath,  ye shall offer a new meal offering to Jehovah.
Ye shall bring out of your habitations two wave-loaves of two tenth parts of an ephah. They shall be of fine flour. They shall be baked with leaven, for first-fruits to Jehovah.
ye shall present with the bread seven lambs without blemish a year old,  one young bullock,  two rams. They shall be a burnt offering to Jehovah, with their meal offering,  their drink offerings, even an offering made by fire, of a sweet savor to Jehovah.
ye shall offer one he-goat for a sin offering,  two he-lambs a year old for a sacrifice of peace offerings.
the priest shall wave them with the bread of the first-fruits for a wave offering before Jehovah, with the two lambs. They shall be holy to Jehovah for the priest.
ye shall make proclamation on the selfsame day, there shall be a holy convocation to you. Ye shall do no job work. It is a statute forever in all your dwellings throughout your generations.
when ye reap the harvest of your land, thou shall not wholly reap the corners of thy field, neither shall thou gather the gleaning of thy harvest. Thou shall leave them for the poor man,  for the sojourner. I am Jehovah your God.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel, saying, In the seventh month, on the first day of the month, shall be a solemn rest to you, a memorial of blowing of trumpets, a holy convocation.
Ye shall do no job work,  ye shall offer an offering made by fire to Jehovah.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
However on the tenth day of this seventh month is the day of atonement. It shall be a holy convocation to you,  ye shall afflict your souls,  ye shall offer an offering made by fire to Jehovah.
ye shall do no manner of work in that same day, for it is a day of atonement, to make atonement for you before Jehovah your God.
For whatever soul it be who shall not be afflicted in that same day, he shall be cut off from his people.
whatever soul it be who does any manner of work in that same day, that soul I will destroy from among his people.
Ye shall do no manner of work. It is a statute forever throughout your generations in all your dwellings.
It shall be to you a sabbath of solemn rest,  ye shall afflict your souls. In the ninth day of the month at evening, from evening to evening, ye shall keep your sabbath.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel, saying, On the fifteenth day of this seventh month is the feast of tabernacles for seven days to Jehovah.
On the first day shall be a holy convocation. Ye shall do no job work.
Seven days ye shall offer an offering made by fire to Jehovah. On the eighth day shall be a holy convocation to you,  ye shall offer an offering made by fire to Jehovah. It is a solemn assembly; ye shall do no job work.
These are the set feasts of Jehovah, which ye shall proclaim to be holy convocations, to offer an offering made by fire to Jehovah, a burnt offering,  a meal offering, a sacrifice,  drink offerings, each on its own day.
Besides the sabbaths of Jehovah,  besides your gifts,  besides all your vows,  besides all your freewill offerings, which ye give to Jehovah.
However on the fifteenth day of the seventh month, when ye have gathered in the fruits of the land, ye shall keep the feast of Jehovah seven days. On the first day shall be a solemn rest,  on the eighth day shall be a solemn rest.
ye shall take to you on the first day the fruit of goodly trees, branches of palm trees,  boughs of thick trees,  willows of the brook,  ye shall rejoice before Jehovah your God seven days.
ye shall keep it a feast to Jehovah seven days in the year. It is a statute forever throughout your generations. Ye shall keep it in the seventh month.
Ye shall dwell in booths seven days. All who are home-born in Israel shall dwell in booths,
that your generations may know that I made the sons of Israel to dwell in booths, when I brought them out of the land of Egypt. I am Jehovah your God.
Moses declared to the sons of Israel the set feasts of Jehovah.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Command the sons of Israel, that they bring to thee pure beaten olive oil for the light, to cause a lamp to burn continually.
Aaron shall keep it outside the veil of the testimony, in the tent of meeting, in order from evening to morning before Jehovah continually. It shall be a statute forever throughout your generations.
He shall keep the lamps upon the pure lampstand in order before Jehovah continually.
thou shall take fine flour,  bake twelve cakes of it. Two tenth parts of an ephah shall be in one cake.
thou shall set them in two rows, six on a row, upon the pure table before Jehovah.
thou shall put pure frankincense upon each row, that it may be on the bread for a memorial, even an offering made by fire to Jehovah.
Every sabbath day he shall set it in order before Jehovah continually. It is on the behalf of the sons of Israel, an everlasting covenant.
it shall be for Aaron and his sons. And they shall eat it in a holy place, for it is most holy to him of the offerings of Jehovah made by fire by a perpetual statute.
the son of an Israelite woman, whose father was an Egyptian, went out among the sons of Israel. And the son of the Israelite woman and a man of Israel strove together in the camp,
the son of the Israelite woman blasphemed the Name,  cursed. And they brought him to Moses. And his mother's name was Shelomith, the daughter of Dibri, of the tribe of Dan.
they put him in ward, that it might be declared to them at the mouth of Jehovah.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Bring forth him who has cursed outside the camp,  let all who heard him lay their hands upon his head,  let all the congregation stone him.
thou shall speak to the sons of Israel, saying, Whoever curses his God shall bear his sin.
he who blasphemes the name of Jehovah, he shall surely be put to death. All the congregation shall certainly stone him. As well the sojourner, as the home-born, when he blasphemes the Name, shall be put to death.
he who smites any man mortally shall surely be put to death.
he who smites a beast mortally shall make it good, life for life.
if a man causes a blemish in his neighbor, as he has done, so shall it be done to him:
injury for injury, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, as he has caused a blemish in a man, so shall it be rendered to him.
he who kills a beast shall make it good. And he who kills a man shall be put to death.
Ye shall have one manner of law, as for the sojourner, as for the home-born, for I am Jehovah your God.
Moses spoke to the sons of Israel,  they brought forth him who had cursed out of the camp,  stoned him with stones. And the sons of Israel did as Jehovah commanded Moses.
Jehovah spoke to Moses at mount Sinai, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel,  say to them, When ye come into the land which I give you, then shall the land keep a sabbath to Jehovah.
Six years thou shall sow thy field,  six years thou shall prune thy vineyard,  gather in the fruits of it,
but in the seventh year shall be a sabbath of solemn rest for the land, a sabbath to Jehovah. Thou shall neither sow thy field, nor prune thy vineyard.
That which grows of itself of thy harvest thou shall not reap,  the grapes of thy undressed vine thou shall not gather. It shall be a year of solemn rest for the land.
the sabbath of the land shall be for food for you: for thee,  for thy servant and for thy maid,  for thy hired servant and for thy stranger, who sojourns with thee.
for thy cattle,  for the beasts that are in thy land, all the increase of it shall be for food.
thou shall number seven sabbaths of years to thee, seven times seven years,  there shall be to thee the days of seven sabbaths of years, even forty-nine years.
Then thou shall send abroad the loud trumpet on the tenth day of the seventh month. In the day of atonement ye shall send abroad the trumpet throughout all your land.
ye shall hallow the fiftieth year,  proclaim liberty throughout the land to all the inhabitants of it. It shall be a jubilee to you,  ye shall return every man to his possession,  ye shall return every man to his family.
That fiftieth year shall be a jubilee to you. Ye shall not sow, neither reap that which grows of itself in it, nor gather in it of the undressed vines.
For it is a jubilee; it shall be holy to you. Ye shall eat the increase of it out of the field.
In this year of jubilee ye shall return every man to his possession.
if thou sell anything to thy neighbor, or buy of thy neighbor's hand, ye shall not wrong each other.
According to the number of years after the jubilee thou shall buy of thy neighbor,  according to the number of years of the crops he shall sell to thee.
According to the multitude of the years thou shall increase the price of it,  according to the fewness of the years thou shall diminish the price of it, for the number of the crops he sells to thee.
ye shall not wrong each other,  thou shall fear thy God, for I am Jehovah your God.
Therefore ye shall do my statutes,  keep my ordinances and do them,  ye shall dwell in the land in safety.
the land shall yield its fruit,  ye shall eat your fill,  dwell in safety in it.
if ye shall say, What shall we eat the seventh year? Behold, we shall not sow, nor gather in our increase,
then I will command my blessing upon you in the sixth year,  it shall bring forth fruit for the three years.
ye shall sow the eighth year,  eat of the fruits, the old storage, until the ninth year. Until its fruits come in, ye shall eat the old storage.
the land shall not be sold in perpetuity, for the land is mine. For ye are strangers and sojourners with me.
in all the land of your possession ye shall grant a redemption for the land.
If thy brother becomes poor,  sells some of his possession, then his kinsman who is next to him shall come,  shall redeem that which his brother has sold.
if a man has no one to redeem it,  he becomes rich and finds sufficient to redeem it,
then let him reckon the years of the sale of it,  restore the excess to the man to whom he sold it,  he shall return to his possession.
But if he is not able to get it back for himself, then that which he has sold shall remain in the hand of him who has bought it until the year of jubilee. And in the jubilee it shall go out,  he shall return to his possession.
if a man sells a dwelling-house in a walled city, then he may redeem it within a whole year after it is sold. For a full year he shall have the right of redemption.
if it be not redeemed within the space of a full year, then the house that is in the walled city shall be made sure in perpetuity to him who bought it, throughout his generations. It shall not go out in the jubilee.
But the houses of the villages which have no wall round about them shall be reckoned with the fields of the country. They may be redeemed,  they shall go out in the jubilee.
Nevertheless the cities of the Levites, the houses of the cities of their possession, the Levites may redeem at any time.
if a man purchases from the Levites, then the house that was sold,  the city of his possession, shall go out in the jubilee. For the houses of the cities of the Levites are their possession among the sons of Israel.
But the field of the suburbs of their cities may not be sold, for it is their perpetual possession.
if thy brother becomes poor,  his hand fails with thee, then thou shall uphold him; he shall live with thee as a stranger and a sojourner.
Take thou no interest from him or increase,  fear thy God, that thy brother may live with thee.
Thou shall not give him thy money upon interest, nor give him thy food for profit.
I am Jehovah your God, who brought you forth out of the land of Egypt, to give you the land of Canaan,  to be your God.
if thy brother becomes poor with thee,  sells himself to thee, thou shall not impose upon him servile labor.
He shall be with thee as a hired servant,  as a sojourner. He shall serve with thee to the year of jubilee.
Then he shall go out from thee, he and his sons with him,  shall return to his own family. And he shall return to the possession of his fathers.
For they are my servants, whom I brought forth out of the land of Egypt. They shall not be sold as bondmen.
Thou shall not rule over him with rigor,  shall fear thy God.
as for thy bondmen,  thy bondmaids, whom thou shall have, from the nations that are round about you, ye shall buy bondmen and bondmaids from them.
Moreover of the sons of the strangers who sojourn among you, ye shall buy from them,  from their families that are with you, which they have begotten in your land,  they shall be your possession.
ye shall make them an inheritance for your sons after you, to hold for a possession. Ye shall take your permanent bondmen from them,  over your brothers the sons of Israel ye shall not rule, one over another, with rigor.
if a stranger or sojourner with thee becomes rich,  thy brother becomes poor beside him,  sells himself to the stranger or sojourner with thee, or to the stock of the stranger's family,
he may be redeemed after he is sold. One of his brothers may redeem him.
Or his uncle, or his uncle's son, may redeem him. Or any who is near of kin to him of his family may redeem him. Or if he becomes rich, he may redeem himself.
he shall reckon with him who bought him from the year that he sold himself to him to the year of jubilee. And the price of his sale shall be according to the number of years. He shall be with him according to the time of a hired servant.
If there be yet many years, according to them he shall give back the price of his redemption out of the money that he was bought for.
if there remain but few years to the year of jubilee, then he shall reckon with him. He shall give back the price of his redemption according to his years.
He shall be with him as a servant hired year by year. He shall not rule with rigor over him in thy sight.
if he is not redeemed by these means, then he shall go out in the year of jubilee, he,  his sons with him.
For the sons of Israel are servants to me. They are my servants whom I brought forth out of the land of Egypt. I am Jehovah your God.
Ye shall make for you no idols. Neither shall ye rear up for you a graven image, or a pillar. Neither shall ye place any figured stone in your land, to bow down to it. For I am Jehovah your God.
Ye shall keep my sabbaths,  reverence my sanctuary. I am Jehovah.
If ye walk in my statutes,  keep my commandments,  do them,
then I will give your rains in their season,  the land shall yield its increase,  the trees of the field shall yield their fruit.
your threshing shall reach to the vintage,  the vintage shall reach to the sowing time,  ye shall eat your bread to the full,  dwell in your land safely.
I will give peace in the land,  ye shall lie down,  none shall make you afraid. And I will cause evil beasts to cease out of the land, nor shall the sword go through your land.
ye shall chase your enemies,  they shall fall before you by the sword.
five of you shall chase a hundred,  a hundred of you shall chase ten thousand,  your enemies shall fall before you by the sword.
I will have respect to you,  make you fruitful,  multiply you,  will establish my covenant with you.
ye shall eat old storage long kept,  ye shall bring forth the old because of the new.
I will set my tabernacle among you,  my soul shall not abhor you.
I will walk among you,  will be your God,  ye shall be my people.
I am Jehovah your God, who brought you forth out of the land of Egypt, that ye should not be their bondmen. And I have broken the bars of your yoke,  made you go upright.
But if ye will not hearken to me,  will not do all these commandments,
if ye shall reject my statutes,  if your soul abhors my ordinances, so that ye will not do all my commandments,  break my covenant,
I also will do this to you: I will appoint terror over you, even consumption and fever, that shall consume the eyes,  make the soul to pine away. And ye shall sow your seed in vain, for your enemies shall eat it.
I will set my face against you,  ye shall be smitten before your enemies. Those who hate you shall rule over you,  ye shall flee when no man pursues you.
if for these things ye will not yet hearken to me, then I will chastise you seven times more for your sins.
I will break the pride of your power. And I will make your sky as iron,  your earth as brass,
your strength shall be spent in vain, for your land shall not yield its increase, nor shall the trees of the land yield their fruit.
if ye walk contrary to me,  will not hearken to me, I will bring seven times more plagues upon you according to your sins.
I will send the beast of the field among you, which shall rob you of your sons,  destroy your cattle,  make you few in number,  your ways shall become desolate.
if by these things ye will not be reformed to me,  will walk contrary to me,
then I also will walk contrary to you,  I will smite you, even I, seven times for your sins.
I will bring a sword upon you that shall execute the vengeance of the covenant,  ye shall be gathered together within your cities. And I will send the pestilence among you,  ye shall be delivered into the hand of the enemy.
When I break your staff of bread, ten women shall bake your bread in one oven,  they shall deliver your bread again by weight,  ye shall eat,  not be satisfied.
if for all this ye will not hearken to me,  walk contrary to me,
then I will walk contrary to you in wrath,  I also will chastise you seven times for your sins.
ye shall eat the flesh of your sons,  the flesh of your daughters ye shall eat.
I will destroy your high places,  cut down your sun-images,  cast your dead bodies upon the bodies of your idols,  my soul shall abhor you.
I will make your cities a waste,  will bring your sanctuaries to desolation,  I will not smell the savor of your sweet odors.
I will bring the land into desolation,  your enemies who dwell in it shall be astonished at it.
I will scatter you among the nations,  I will draw out the sword after you,  your land shall be a desolation,  your cities shall be a waste.
Then the land shall enjoy its sabbaths, as long as it lies desolate,  ye are in your enemies' land, even then shall the land rest,  enjoy its sabbaths.
As long as it lies desolate it shall have rest, even the rest which it had not in your sabbaths, when ye dwelt upon it.
as for those who are left of you, I will send a faintness into their heart in the lands of their enemies. And the sound of a driven leaf shall chase them,  they shall flee as a man flees from the sword,  they shall fall when no man pursues.
they shall stumble one upon another, as it were before the sword, when no man pursues. And ye shall have no power to stand before your enemies.
ye shall perish among the nations,  the land of your enemies shall eat you up.
those who are left of you shall pine away in their iniquity in your enemies' lands,  also in the iniquities of their fathers they shall pine away with them.
they shall confess their iniquity,  the iniquity of their fathers, in their trespass which they trespassed against me,  also that, because they walked contrary to me,
I also walked contrary to them,  brought them into the land of their enemies. If then their uncircumcised heart be humbled,  they then accept of the punishment of their iniquity,
then I will remember my covenant with Jacob,  also my covenant with Isaac,  also my covenant with Abraham will I remember,  I will remember the land.
The land also shall be left by them,  shall enjoy its sabbaths while it lies desolate without them. And they shall accept of the punishment of their iniquity, because, even because they rejected my ordinances,  their soul abhorred my statutes.
yet for all that, when they are in the land of their enemies, I will not reject them, neither will I abhor them, to destroy them utterly,  to break my covenant with them, for I am Jehovah their God,
but for their sakes I will remember the covenant of their ancestors, whom I brought forth out of the land of Egypt in the sight of the nations, that I might be their God. I am Jehovah.
These are the statutes and ordinances and laws, which Jehovah made between him and the sons of Israel at mount Sinai by Moses.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel,  say to them, When a man shall accomplish a vow, the persons shall be for Jehovah by thy estimation.
thy estimation shall be of the male from twenty years old even to sixty years old, even thy estimation shall be fifty shekels of silver, after the shekel of the sanctuary.
if it be a female, then thy estimation shall be thirty shekels.
if it be from five years old even to twenty years old, then thy estimation shall be of the male twenty shekels,  for the female ten shekels.
if it be from a month old even to five years old, then thy estimation shall be of the male five shekels of silver,  for the female thy estimation shall be three shekels of silver.
if it be from sixty years old and upward, if it be a male, then thy estimation shall be fifteen shekels,  for the female ten shekels.
But if he be poorer than thy estimation, then he shall be set before the priest,  the priest shall value him; according to the ability of him who vowed shall the priest value him.
if it be a beast, of which men offer an oblation to Jehovah, all that any man gives of such to Jehovah shall be holy.
He shall not alter it, nor change it, a good for a bad, or a bad for a good. And if he shall at all change beast for beast, then both it and that for which it is changed shall be holy.
if it be any unclean beast, of which they do not offer an oblation to Jehovah, then he shall set the beast before the priest,
the priest shall value it, whether it be good or bad. As thou the priest values it, so shall it be.
But if he will indeed redeem it, then he shall add the fifth part of it to thy estimation.
when a man shall sanctify his house to be holy to Jehovah, then the priest shall estimate it, whether it be good or bad. As the priest shall estimate it, so shall it stand.
if he who sanctified it will redeem his house, then he shall add the fifth part of the money of thy estimation to it,  it shall be his.
if a man shall sanctify to Jehovah part of the field of his possession, then thy estimation shall be according to the sowing of it, the sowing of a homer of barley at fifty shekels of silver.
If he sanctifies his field from the year of jubilee, according to thy estimation it shall stand.
But if he sanctifies his field after the jubilee, then the priest shall reckon to him the money according to the years that remain to the year of jubilee,  an abatement shall be made from thy estimation.
if he who sanctified the field will indeed redeem it, then he shall add the fifth part of the money of thy estimation to it,  it shall be assured to him.
if he will not redeem the field, or if he has sold the field to another man, it shall not be redeemed any more,
but the field, when it goes out in the jubilee, shall be holy to Jehovah, as a field set apart; the possession of it shall be the priest's.
if he sanctifies to Jehovah a field which he has bought, which is not of the field of his possession,
then the priest shall reckon to him the worth of thy estimation to the year of jubilee,  he shall give thine estimation in that day, as a holy thing to Jehovah.
In the year of jubilee the field shall return to him of whom it was bought, even to him to whom the possession of the land belongs.
all thy estimations shall be according to the shekel of the sanctuary; twenty gerahs shall be the shekel.
Only the firstling among beasts, which is made a firstling to Jehovah, no man shall sanctify it, whether it be ox or sheep, it is Jehovah's.
if it be of an unclean beast, then he shall ransom it according to thine estimation,  shall add to it the fifth part of it, or if it be not redeemed, then it shall be sold according to thy estimation.
Notwithstanding, nothing set apart, that a man shall set apart to Jehovah of all that he has, whether of man or beast, or of the field of his possession, shall be sold or redeemed; everything set apart is most holy to Jehovah.
No one set apart, who shall be set apart from among men, shall be ransomed; he shall surely be put to death.
all the tithe of the land, whether of the seed of the land, or of the fruit of the tree, is Jehovah's; it is holy to Jehovah.
if a man will redeem any of his tithe, he shall add to it the fifth part of it.
all the tithe of the herd or the flock, whatever passes under the rod, the tenth shall be holy to Jehovah.
He shall not search whether it be good or bad, neither shall he change it. And if he changes it at all, then both it and that for which it is changed shall be holy; it shall not be redeemed.
These are the commandments, which Jehovah commanded Moses for the sons of Israel at mount Sinai.
Numbers
Jehovah spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, in the tent of meeting, on the first day of the second month, in the second year after they came out of the land of Egypt, saying,
Take ye the sum of all the congregation of the sons of Israel, by their families, by their fathers' houses, according to the number of the names, every male, by their polls,
from twenty years old and upward, all who are able to go forth to war in Israel. Thou and Aaron shall number them by their armies.
with you there shall be a man of every tribe, each one head of his fathers' house.
these are the names of the men who shall stand with you. Of Reuben: Elizur the son of Shedeur.
Of Simeon: Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai.
Of Judah: Nahshon the son of Amminadab.
Of Issachar: Nethanel the son of Zuar.
Of Zebulun: Eliab the son of Helon.
Of the sons of Joseph, of Ephraim: Elishama the son of Ammihud; of Manasseh: Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur.
Of Benjamin: Abidan the son of Gideoni.
Of Dan: Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai.
Of Asher: Pagiel the son of Ochran.
Of Gad: Eliasaph the son of Deuel.
Of Naphtali: Ahira the son of Enan.
These are those who were called from the congregation, the rulers of the tribes of their fathers. They were the heads of the thousands of Israel.
Moses and Aaron took these men who are mentioned by name,
they assembled all the congregation together on the first day of the second month. And they declared their ancestry after their families, by their fathers' houses, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, by their polls.
As Jehovah commanded Moses, so he numbered them in the wilderness of Sinai.
the sons of Reuben, Israel's firstborn, their generations, by their families, by their fathers' houses, according to the number of the names, by their polls, every male from twenty years old and upward, all who were able to go forth to war,
those who were numbered of them, of the tribe of Reuben, were forty-six thousand and five hundred.
Of the sons of Simeon, their generations, by their families, by their fathers' houses, those who were numbered of it, according to the number of the names, by their polls, every male from twenty years old and upward, all who were able to go forth to war,
those who were numbered of them, of the tribe of Simeon, were fifty-nine thousand and three hundred.
Of the sons of Gad, their generations, by their families, by their fathers' houses, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war,
those who were numbered of them, of the tribe of Gad, were forty-five thousand six hundred and fifty.
Of the sons of Judah, their generations, by their families, by their fathers' houses, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war,
those who were numbered of them, of the tribe of Judah, were seventy-four thousand and six hundred.
Of the sons of Issachar, their generations, by their families, by their fathers' houses, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war,
those who were numbered of them, of the tribe of Issachar, were fifty-four thousand and four hundred.
Of the sons of Zebulun, their generations, by their families, by their fathers' houses, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war,
those who were numbered of them, of the tribe of Zebulun, were fifty-seven thousand and four hundred.
Of the sons of Joseph, namely, of the sons of Ephraim, their generations, by their families, by their fathers' houses, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war,
those who were numbered of them, of the tribe of Ephraim, were forty thousand and five hundred;
of the sons of Manasseh, their generations, by their families, by their fathers' houses, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war,
those who were numbered of them, of the tribe of Manasseh, were thirty-two thousand and two hundred.
Of the sons of Benjamin, their generations, by their families, by their fathers' houses, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war,
those who were numbered of them, of the tribe of Benjamin, were thirty-five thousand and four hundred.
Of the sons of Dan, their generations, by their families, by their fathers' houses, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war,
those who were numbered of them, of the tribe of Dan, were sixty-two thousand and seven hundred.
Of the sons of Asher, their generations, by their families, by their fathers' houses, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war,
those who were numbered of them, of the tribe of Asher, were forty-one thousand and five hundred.
Of the sons of Naphtali, their generations, by their families, by their fathers' houses, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war,
those who were numbered of them, of the tribe of Naphtali, were fifty-three thousand and four hundred.
These are those who were numbered, whom Moses and Aaron numbered,  the rulers of Israel, being twelve men. They were each one for his fathers' house.
So all those who were numbered of the sons of Israel by their fathers' houses, from twenty years old and upward, all who were able to go forth to war in Israel,
even all those who were numbered were six hundred three thousand and five hundred and fifty.
But the Levites according to the tribe of their fathers were not numbered among them.
For Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Only the tribe of Levi thou shall not number, neither shall thou take the sum of them among the sons of Israel,
but appoint thou the Levites over the tabernacle of the testimony,  over all the furniture of it,  over all that belongs to it. They shall bear the tabernacle,  all the furniture of it,  they shall minister to it,  shall encamp round about the tabernacle.
when the tabernacle sets forward, the Levites shall take it down,  when the tabernacle is to be pitched, the Levites shall set it up. And the stranger who comes near shall be put to death.
the sons of Israel shall pitch their tents, every man by his own camp,  every man by his own standard, according to their armies.
But the Levites shall encamp round about the tabernacle of the testimony, that there be no wrath upon the congregation of the sons of Israel. And the Levites shall keep the charge of the tabernacle of the testimony.
Thus did the sons of Israel. According to all that Jehovah commanded Moses, so they did.
Jehovah spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying,
The sons of Israel shall encamp every man by his own standard, with the ensigns of their fathers' houses. They shall encamp round about opposite the tent of meeting.
those who encamp on the east side toward the sunrise shall be those of the standard of the camp of Judah, according to their armies. And the ruler of the sons of Judah shall be Nahshon the son of Amminadab.
his army,  those who were numbered of them, were seventy-four thousand and six hundred.
those who encamp next to him shall be the tribe of Issachar. And the ruler of the sons of Issachar shall be Nethanel the son of Zuar.
his army,  those who were numbered of it, were fifty-four thousand and four hundred.
Then the tribe of Zebulun. And the ruler of the sons of Zebulun shall be Eliab the son of Helon.
his army,  those who were numbered of it, were fifty-seven thousand and four hundred.
All who were numbered of the camp of Judah were a hundred eighty-six thousand and four hundred, according to their armies. They shall set forth first.
On the south side shall be the standard of the camp of Reuben according to their armies. And the ruler of the sons of Reuben shall be Elizur the son of Shedeur.
his army,  those who were numbered of it, were forty-six thousand and five hundred.
those who encamp next to him shall be the tribe of Simeon. And the ruler of the sons of Simeon shall be Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai.
his army,  those who were numbered of them, were fifty-nine thousand and three hundred.
Then the tribe of Gad. And the ruler of the sons of Gad shall be Eliasaph the son of Reuel.
his army,  those who were numbered of them, were forty-five thousand and six hundred and fifty.
All who were numbered of the camp of Reuben were a hundred fifty-one thousand and four hundred and fifty, according to their armies. And they shall set forth second.
Then the tent of meeting shall set forward, with the camp of the Levites in the midst of the camps. As they encamp, so shall they set forward, every man in his place, by their standards.
On the west side shall be the standard of the camp of Ephraim according to their armies. And the ruler of the sons of Ephraim shall be Elishama the son of Ammihud.
his army,  those who were numbered of them, were forty thousand and five hundred.
next to him shall be the tribe of Manasseh. And the ruler of the sons of Manasseh shall be Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur.
his army,  those who were numbered of them, were thirty-two thousand and two hundred.
Then the tribe of Benjamin. And the ruler of the sons of Benjamin shall be Abidan the son of Gideoni.
his army,  those who were numbered of them, were thirty-five thousand and four hundred.
All who were numbered of the camp of Ephraim were a hundred eight thousand and a hundred, according to their armies. And they shall set forth third.
On the north side shall be the standard of the camp of Dan according to their armies. And the ruler of the sons of Dan shall be Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai.
his army,  those who were numbered of them, were sixty-two thousand and seven hundred.
those who encamp next to him shall be the tribe of Asher. And the ruler of the sons of Asher shall be Pagiel the son of Ochran.
his army,  those who were numbered of them, were forty-one thousand and five hundred.
Then the tribe of Naphtali. And the ruler of the sons of Naphtali shall be Ahira the son of Enan.
his army,  those who were numbered of them, were fifty-three thousand and four hundred.
All that were numbered of the camp of Dan were a hundred fifty-seven thousand and six hundred. They shall set forth rearmost by their standards.
These are those who were numbered of the sons of Israel by their fathers' houses. All who were numbered of the camps according to their armies were six hundred three thousand and five hundred and fifty.
But the Levites were not numbered among the sons of Israel, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
Thus did the sons of Israel. According to all that Jehovah commanded Moses, so they encamped by their standards,  so they set forward, everyone by their families, according to their fathers' houses.
Now these are the generations of Aaron and Moses in the day that Jehovah spoke with Moses in mount Sinai:
these are the names of the sons of Aaron: Nadab the firstborn,  Abihu, Eleazar,  Ithamar.
These are the names of the sons of Aaron, the priests who were anointed, whom he consecrated to minister in the priest's office.
Nadab and Abihu died before Jehovah when they offered strange fire before Jehovah in the wilderness of Sinai,  they had no sons. And Eleazar and Ithamar ministered in the priest's office in the presence of Aaron their father.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Bring the tribe of Levi near,  set them before Aaron the priest, that they may minister to him.
they shall keep his charge,  the charge of the whole congregation before the tent of meeting, to do the service of the tabernacle.
they shall keep all the furniture of the tent of meeting,  the charge of the sons of Israel, to do the service of the tabernacle.
thou shall give the Levites to Aaron and to his sons. They are wholly given to him on the behalf of the sons of Israel.
thou shall appoint Aaron and his sons,  they shall keep their priesthood. And the stranger who comes near shall be put to death.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
I, behold, I have taken the Levites from among the sons of Israel instead of all the firstborn who opens the womb among the sons of Israel. And the Levites shall be mine,
for all the firstborn are mine. On the day that I smote all the firstborn in the land of Egypt I hallowed to me all the firstborn in Israel, both man and beast. They shall be mine. I am Jehovah.
Jehovah spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, saying,
Number the sons of Levi by their fathers' houses, by their families. Thou shall number them, every male from a month old and upward.
Moses numbered them according to the word of Jehovah, as he was commanded.
these were the sons of Levi by their names: Gershon,  Kohath,  Merari.
these are the names of the sons of Gershon by their families: Libni and Shimei.
the sons of Kohath by their families: Amram,  Izhar, Hebron,  Uzziel.
the sons of Merari by their families: Mahli and Mushi. These are the families of the Levites according to their fathers' houses.
Of Gershon was the family of the Libnites,  the family of the Shimeites. These are the families of the Gershonites.
Those who were numbered of them, according to the number of all the males, from a month old and upward, even those who were numbered of them were seven thousand and five hundred.
The families of the Gershonites shall encamp behind the tabernacle westward.
the ruler of the fathers' house of the Gershonites shall be Eliasaph the son of Lael.
the charge of the sons of Gershon in the tent of meeting shall be the tabernacle,  the tent, the covering of it,  the screen for the door of the tent of meeting,
the hangings of the court,  the screen for the door of the court, which is by the tabernacle,  by the altar round about,  the cords of it for all the service thereof.
of Kohath was the family of the Amramites,  the family of the Izharites,  the family of the Hebronites,  the family of the Uzzielites. These are the families of the Kohathites.
According to the number of all the males, from a month old and upward, there were eight thousand and six hundred, keeping the charge of the sanctuary.
The families of the sons of Kohath shall encamp on the side of the tabernacle southward.
the ruler of the fathers' house of the families of the Kohathites shall be Elizaphan the son of Uzziel.
their charge shall be the ark,  the table,  the lampstand,  the altars,  the vessels of the sanctuary with which they minister,  the screen,  all the service thereof.
Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest shall be ruler of the rulers of the Levites, with the oversight of those who keep the charge of the sanctuary.
Of Merari was the family of the Mahlites,  the family of the Mushites. These are the families of Merari.
those who were numbered of them, according to the number of all the males, from a month old and upward, were six thousand and two hundred.
the ruler of the fathers' house of the families of Merari was Zuriel the son of Abihail. They shall encamp on the side of the tabernacle northward.
the appointed charge of the sons of Merari shall be the boards of the tabernacle,  the bars of it,  the pillars of it,  the sockets of it,  all the instruments of it,  all the service thereof,
the pillars of the court round about,  their sockets,  their pegs,  their cords.
those who encamp before the tabernacle eastward, before the tent of meeting toward the sunrise, shall be Moses,  Aaron and his sons, keeping the charge of the sanctuary for the charge of the sons of Israel. And the stranger that comes near shall be put to death.
All who were numbered of the Levites, whom Moses and Aaron numbered at the commandment of Jehovah, by their families, all the males from a month old and upward, were twenty-two thousand.
Jehovah said to Moses, Number all the firstborn males of the sons of Israel from a month old and upward,  take the number of their names.
thou shall take the Levites for me (I am Jehovah) instead of all the firstborn among the sons of Israel,  the cattle of the Levites instead of all the firstlings among the cattle of the sons of Israel.
Moses numbered, as Jehovah commanded him, all the firstborn among the sons of Israel.
all the firstborn males according to the number of names, from a month old and upward, of those who were numbered of them, were twenty-two thousand two hundred and seventy-three.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Take the Levites instead of all the firstborn among the sons of Israel,  the cattle of the Levites instead of their cattle. And the Levites shall be mine. I am Jehovah.
for the redemption of the two hundred and seventy-three of the firstborn of the sons of Israel, who are over and above the number of the Levites,
thou shall take five shekels apiece by the poll. According to the shekel of the sanctuary thou shall take them (the shekel is twenty gerahs),
thou shall give the money, with which the odd number of them is redeemed, to Aaron and to his sons.
Moses took the redemption-money from those who were over and above those who were redeemed by the Levites.
He took the money from the firstborn of the sons of Israel, a thousand three hundred and sixty-five shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary.
Moses gave the redemption-money to Aaron and to his sons, according to the word of Jehovah, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
Jehovah spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying,
Take the sum of the sons of Kohath from among the sons of Levi, by their families, by their fathers' houses,
from thirty years old and upward even until fifty years old, all who enter upon the service, to do the work in the tent of meeting.
This is the service of the sons of Kohath in the tent of meeting, about the most holy things:
When the camp sets forward, Aaron shall go in,  his sons,  they shall take down the veil of the screen,  cover the ark of the testimony with it.
shall put on it a covering of certain skin,  shall spread over it a cloth all of blue,  shall put in the staves of it.
upon the table of showbread they shall spread a cloth of blue,  put on it the dishes,  the spoons,  the bowls and the cups with which to pour out. And the continual bread shall be on it.
they shall spread upon them a cloth of scarlet,  cover the same with a covering of certain skin,  shall put in the staves of it.
they shall take a cloth of blue,  cover the lampstand of the light,  its lamps,  its snuffers,  its snuff dishes,  all the oil vessels of it, with which they minister to it.
they shall put it and all the vessels of it within a covering of certain skin,  shall put it upon the frame.
upon the golden altar they shall spread a cloth of blue,  cover it with a covering of certain skin,  shall put in the staves of it.
they shall take all the vessels of ministry, with which they minister in the sanctuary,  put them in a cloth of blue,  cover them with a covering of certain skin,  shall put them on the frame.
they shall take away the ashes from the altar,  spread a purple cloth on it.
they shall put upon it all the vessels of it, with which they minister about it: the firepans, the flesh-hooks,  the shovels,  the basins, all the vessels of the altar. And they shall spread upon it a covering of certain skin,  put in the staves of it.
when Aaron and his sons have made an end of covering the sanctuary,  all the furniture of the sanctuary, as the camp is set forward, after that, the sons of Kohath shall come to bear it,  they shall not touch the sanctuary, lest they die. These things are the burden of the sons of Kohath in the tent of meeting.
the charge of Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest shall be the oil for the light,  the sweet incense,  the continual meal offering,  the anointing oil, the charge of all the tabernacle,  of all that is in it: the sanctuary,  the furniture of it.
Jehovah spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying,
Cut ye not off the tribe of the families of the Kohathites from among the Levites,
but thus do to them, that they may live,  not die, when they approach to the most holy things. Aaron and his sons shall go in,  appoint for them each one to his service and to his burden,
but they shall not go in to see the sanctuary even for a moment, lest they die.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Take the sum of the sons of Gershon also, by their fathers' houses, by their families,
from thirty years old and upward until fifty years old thou shall number them, all who enter in to wait upon the service, to do the work in the tent of meeting.
This is the service of the families of the Gershonites, in serving and in bearing burdens:
They shall bear the curtains of the tabernacle,  the tent of meeting, its covering,  the covering of certain skin that is above upon it,  the screen for the door of the tent of meeting,
the hangings of the court,  the screen for the door of the gate of the court, which is by the tabernacle and by the altar round about,  their cords,  all the instruments of their service,  whatever shall be done with them; therein they shall serve.
At the commandment of Aaron and his sons shall be all the service of the sons of the Gershonites, in all their burden,  in all their service. And ye shall appoint to those in charge all their burden.
This is the service of the families of the sons of the Gershonites in the tent of meeting. And their charge shall be under the hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest.
As for the sons of Merari, thou shall number them by their families, by their fathers' houses.
From thirty years old and upward even to fifty years old thou shall number them, each man who enters upon the service, to do the work of the tent of meeting.
this is the charge of their burden, according to all their service in the tent of meeting: the boards of the tabernacle,  the bars of it,  the pillars of it,  the sockets of it,
the pillars of the court round about,  their sockets,  their pegs,  their cords, with all their instruments,  with all their service. And ye shall appoint the instruments of the charge of their burden by name.
This is the service of the families of the sons of Merari, according to all their service, in the tent of meeting, under the hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest.
Moses and Aaron and the rulers of the congregation numbered the sons of the Kohathites by their families,  by their fathers' houses,
from thirty years old and upward even to fifty years old, each man who entered upon the service, for work in the tent of meeting.
those who were numbered of them by their families were two thousand seven hundred and fifty.
These are those who were numbered of the families of the Kohathites, all who served in the tent of meeting, whom Moses and Aaron numbered according to the commandment of Jehovah by Moses.
those who were numbered of the sons of Gershon, their families,  by their fathers' houses,
from thirty years old and upward even to fifty years old, each man who entered upon the service, for work in the tent of meeting,
even those who were numbered of them, by their families, by their fathers' houses, were two thousand and six hundred and thirty.
These are those who were numbered of the families of the sons of Gershon, all who served in the tent of meeting, whom Moses and Aaron numbered according to the commandment of Jehovah.
those who were numbered of the families of the sons of Merari, by their families, by their fathers' houses,
from thirty years old and upward even to fifty years old, each man who entered upon the service, for work in the tent of meeting,
even those who were numbered of them by their families, were three thousand and two hundred.
These are those who were numbered of the families of the sons of Merari, whom Moses and Aaron numbered according to the commandment of Jehovah by Moses.
All those who were numbered of the Levites, whom Moses and Aaron and the rulers of Israel numbered, by their families,  by their fathers' houses,
from thirty years old and upward even to fifty years old, each man who entered in to do the work of service,  the work of bearing burdens in the tent of meeting,
even those who were numbered of them, were eight thousand and five hundred and eighty.
According to the commandment of Jehovah they were numbered by Moses, each man according to his service,  according to his burden. Thus they were numbered by him, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Command the sons of Israel, that they put out of the camp every leper,  every man who has an issue,  whoever is unclean about life.
Ye shall put out both male and female. Ye shall put them outside the camp, that they not defile their camp, in the midst of which I dwell.
the sons of Israel did so,  put them outside the camp. As Jehovah spoke to Moses, so did the sons of Israel.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel, When a man or woman shall commit any sin that men commit, so as to trespass against Jehovah,  that soul shall be guilty,
then he shall confess his sin which he has done. And he shall make restitution for his guilt in full,  add to it the fifth part of it,  give it to him in respect of whom he has been guilty.
But if the man has no kinsman to whom restitution may be made for the guilt, the restitution for guilt which is made to Jehovah shall be the priest's, besides the ram of the atonement, by which atonement shall be made for him.
every heave offering of all the holy things of the sons of Israel, which they present to the priest, shall be his.
every man's hallowed things shall be his. Whatever any man gives the priest, it shall be his.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel,  say to them, If any man's wife goes aside,  commits a trespass against him,
a man lies with her carnally,  it be hid from the eyes of her husband,  be kept close,  she be defiled,  there be no witness against her,  she is not taken in the act,
the spirit of jealousy comes upon him,  he be jealous of his wife,  she be defiled, or if the spirit of jealousy comes upon him,  he be jealous of his wife,  she is not defiled,
then the man shall bring his wife to the priest,  shall bring her oblation for her, the tenth part of an ephah of barley meal. He shall pour no oil upon it, nor put frankincense on it, for it is a meal offering of jealousy, a meal offering of memorial, bringing iniquity to remembrance.
the priest shall bring her near,  set her before Jehovah.
the priest shall take holy water in an earthen vessel. And the priest shall take of the dust that is on the floor of the tabernacle,  put it into the water.
the priest shall set the woman before Jehovah,  let the hair of the woman's head go loose,  put the meal offering of memorial in her hands, which is the meal offering of jealousy. And the priest shall have in his hand the water of bitterness that causes the curse.
the priest shall cause her to swear,  shall say to the woman, If no man has lain with thee,  if thou have not gone aside to uncleanness, being under thy husband, be thou free from this water of bitterness that causes the curse.
But if thou have gone aside, being under thy husband,  if thou are defiled,  some man has lain with thee besides thy husband,
then the priest shall cause the woman to swear with the oath of cursing,  the priest shall say to the woman, Jehovah make thee a curse and an oath among thy people when Jehovah makes thy thigh to fall away,  thy body to swell.
this water that causes the curse shall go into thy bowels,  make thy body to swell,  thy thigh to fall away. And the woman shall say, Truly, Truly.
the priest shall write these curses in a book,  he shall blot them out into the water of bitterness.
he shall make the woman drink the water of bitterness that causes the curse. And the water that causes the curse shall enter into her bitter.
the priest shall take the meal offering of jealousy out of the woman's hand,  shall wave the meal offering before Jehovah,  bring it to the altar.
the priest shall take a handful of the meal offering, as the memorial of it,  burn it upon the altar,  afterward shall make the woman drink the water.
when he has made her drink the water, then it shall come to pass, if she is defiled,  has committed a trespass against her husband, that the water that causes the curse shall enter into her bitter,  her body shall swell,  her thigh shall fall away. And the woman shall be a curse among her people.
if the woman is not defiled,  is clean, then she shall be free,  shall conceive seed.
This is the law of jealousy, when a wife, being under her husband, goes aside,  is defiled,
or when the spirit of jealousy comes upon a man,  he is jealous of his wife. Then he shall set the woman before Jehovah,  the priest shall execute upon her all this law.
the man shall be free from iniquity,  that woman shall bear her iniquity.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel,  say to them, When either man or woman shall make a special vow, the vow of a Nazirite, to separate himself to Jehovah,
he shall separate himself from wine and strong drink. He shall drink no vinegar of wine, or vinegar of strong drink, neither shall he drink any juice of grapes, nor eat fresh grapes or dried.
All the days of his separation he shall eat nothing that is made of the grapevine, from the kernels even to the husk.
All the days of his vow of separation there shall no razor come upon his head. Until the days be fulfilled, in which he separates himself to Jehovah, he shall be holy. He shall let the locks of the hair of his head grow long.
He shall not come near to a dead body all the days that he separates himself to Jehovah.
He shall not make himself unclean for his father, or for his mother, for his brother, or for his sister, when they die, because his separation to God is upon his head.
All the days of his separation he is holy to Jehovah.
if any man dies very suddenly beside him,  he defiles the head of his separation, then he shall shave his head in the day of his cleansing; on the seventh day he shall shave it.
on the eighth day he shall bring two turtle-doves, or two young pigeons to the priest, to the door of the tent of meeting.
the priest shall offer one for a sin offering,  the other for a burnt offering,  make atonement for him, because he sinned by reason of the dead,  shall hallow his head that same day.
he shall separate to Jehovah the days of his separation,  shall bring a he-lamb a year old for a trespass offering. But the former days shall be void, because his separation was defiled.
this is the law of the Nazirite when the days of his separation are fulfilled: He shall be brought to the door of the tent of meeting,
he shall offer his oblation to Jehovah: one he-lamb a year old without blemish for a burnt offering,  one ewe-lamb a year old without blemish for a sin offering,  one ram without blemish for peace offerings,
a basket of unleavened bread, cakes of fine flour mingled with oil,  unleavened wafers anointed with oil,  their meal offering,  their drink offerings.
the priest shall present them before Jehovah,  shall offer his sin offering,  his burnt offering.
he shall offer the ram for a sacrifice of peace offerings to Jehovah, with the basket of unleavened bread. The priest shall also offer the meal offering of it,  the drink offering of it.
the Nazirite shall shave the head of his separation at the door of the tent of meeting,  shall take the hair of the head of his separation,  put it on the fire which is under the sacrifice of peace offerings.
the priest shall take the boiled shoulder of the ram,  one unleavened cake out of the basket,  one unleavened wafer,  shall put them upon the hands of the Nazirite, after he has shaven his separation,
the priest shall wave them for a wave offering before Jehovah. This is holy for the priest, together with the wave-breast and heave-thigh. And after that the Nazirite may drink wine.
This is the law of the Nazirite who vows,  of his oblation to Jehovah for his separation, besides that which he is able to get. According to his vow which he vows, so he must do after the law of his separation.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to Aaron and to his sons, saying, This way ye shall bless the sons of Israel: Ye shall say to them,
Jehovah bless thee,  keep thee.
Jehovah make his face to shine upon thee,  be gracious to thee.
Jehovah lift up his countenance upon thee,  give thee peace.
So shall they put my name upon the sons of Israel,  I will bless them.
it came to pass on the day that Moses made an end of setting up the tabernacle, that he anointed it and sanctified it,  all the furniture of it,  the altar and all the vessels of it,  anointed them and sanctified them.
Then the rulers of Israel, the heads of their fathers' houses, offered. These were the rulers of the tribes. These are those who were over those who were numbered.
they brought their oblation before Jehovah: six covered wagons,  twelve oxen; a wagon for every two of the rulers,  for each one an ox. And they presented them before the tabernacle.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Take it from them, that they may be used in doing the service of the tent of meeting. And thou shall give them to the Levites, to every man according to his service.
Moses took the wagons and the oxen,  gave them to the Levites.
Two wagons and four oxen he gave to the sons of Gershon, according to their service.
he gave four wagons and eight oxen to the sons of Merari, according to their service, under the hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest.
But he gave none to the sons of Kohath, because the service of the sanctuary belonged to them. They bore it upon their shoulders.
the rulers offered for the dedication of the altar in the day that it was anointed, even the rulers offered their oblation before the altar.
Jehovah said to Moses, They shall offer their oblation, each ruler on his day, for the dedication of the altar.
he who offered his oblation the first day was Nahshon the son of Amminadab, of the tribe of Judah.
his oblation was one silver platter, the weight of which was a hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meal offering;
one golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense;
one young bullock, one ram, one he-lamb a year old, for a burnt offering;
one male of the goats for a sin offering;
for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five he-lambs a year old. This was the oblation of Nahshon the son of Amminadab.
On the second day Nethanel the son of Zuar, ruler of Issachar, offered.
He offered for his oblation one silver platter, the weight of which was a hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meal offering;
one golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense;
one young bullock, one ram, one he-lamb a year old, for a burnt offering;
one male of the goats for a sin offering;
for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five he-lambs a year old. This was the oblation of Nethanel the son of Zuar.
On the third day was Eliab the son of Helon, ruler of the sons of Zebulun.
His oblation was one silver platter, the weight of which was a hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meal offering;
one golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense;
one young bullock, one ram, one he-lamb a year old, for a burnt offering;
one male of the goats for a sin offering;
for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five he-lambs a year old. This was the oblation of Eliab the son of Helon.
On the fourth day was Elizur the son of Shedeur, ruler of the sons of Reuben.
His oblation was one silver platter, the weight of which was a hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meal offering;
one golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense;
one young bullock, one ram, one he-lamb a year old, for a burnt offering;
one male of the goats for a sin offering;
for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five he-lambs a year old. This was the oblation of Elizur the son of Shedeur.
On the fifth day was Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai, ruler of the sons of Simeon.
His oblation was one silver platter, the weight of which was a hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meal offering;
one golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense;
one young bullock, one ram, one he-lamb a year old, for a burnt offering;
one male of the goats for a sin offering;
for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five he-lambs a year old. This was the oblation of Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai.
On the sixth day was Eliasaph the son of Deuel, ruler of the sons of Gad.
His oblation was one silver platter, the weight of which was a hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meal offering;
one golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense;
one young bullock, one ram, one he-lamb a year old, for a burnt offering;
one male of the goats for a sin offering;
for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five he-lambs a year old. This was the oblation of Eliasaph the son of Deuel.
On the seventh day was Elishama the son of Ammihud, ruler of the sons of Ephraim.
His oblation was one silver platter, the weight of which was a hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meal offering;
one golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense;
one young bullock, one ram, one he-lamb a year old, for a burnt offering;
one male of the goats for a sin offering;
for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five he-lambs a year old. This was the oblation of Elishama the son of Ammihud.
On the eighth day was Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur, ruler of the sons of Manasseh.
His oblation was one silver platter, the weight of which was a hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meal offering;
one golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense;
one young bullock, one ram, one he-lamb a year old, for a burnt offering;
one male of the goats for a sin offering;
for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five he-lambs a year old. This was the oblation of Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur.
On the ninth day was Abidan the son of Gideoni, ruler of the sons of Benjamin.
His oblation was one silver platter, the weight of which was a hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meal offering;
one golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense;
one young bullock, one ram, one he-lamb a year old, for a burnt offering;
one male of the goats for a sin offering;
for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five he-lambs a year old. This was the oblation of Abidan the son of Gideoni.
On the tenth day was Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai, ruler of the sons of Dan.
His oblation was one silver platter, the weight of which was a hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meal offering;
one golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense;
one young bullock, one ram, one he-lamb a year old, for a burnt offering;
one male of the goats for a sin offering;
for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five he-lambs a year old. This was the oblation of Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai.
On the eleventh day was Pagiel the son of Ochran, ruler of the sons of Asher.
His oblation was one silver platter, the weight of which was a hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meal offering;
one golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense;
one young bullock, one ram, one he-lamb a year old, for a burnt offering;
one male of the goats for a sin offering;
for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five he-lambs a year old. This was the oblation of Pagiel the son of Ochran.
On the twelfth day was Ahira the son of Enan, ruler of the sons of Naphtali.
His oblation was one silver platter, the weight of which was a hundred a thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meal offering;
one golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense;
one young bullock, one ram, one he-lamb a year old, for a burnt offering;
one male of the goats for a sin offering;
for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five he-lambs a year old. This was the oblation of Ahira the son of Enan.
This was the dedication of the altar, in the day when it was anointed, by the rulers of Israel: twelve silver platters, twelve silver bowls, twelve golden spoons,
each silver platter weighing a hundred and thirty shekels,  each bowl seventy. All the silver of the vessels was two thousand and four hundred shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary.
The twelve golden spoons, full of incense, weighed ten shekels apiece, according to the shekel of the sanctuary. All the gold of the spoons was a hundred and twenty shekels.
All the oxen for the burnt offering were twelve bullocks, the rams twelve, the he-lambs a year old twelve,  their meal offering,  the males of the goats for a sin offering twelve.
all the oxen for the sacrifice of peace offerings was twenty-four bullocks, the rams sixty, the he-goats sixty, the he-lambs a year old sixty. This was the dedication of the altar after it was anointed.
when Moses went into the tent of meeting to speak with him, then he heard the Voice speaking to him from above the mercy-seat that was upon the ark of the testimony, from between the two cherubim,  he spoke to him.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to Aaron,  say to him, When thou light the lamps, the seven lamps shall give light in front of the lampstand.
Aaron did so. He lit the lamps of it in front of the lampstand, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
this was the work of the lampstand, beaten work of gold. To the base of it,  to the flowers of it, it was beaten work. According to the pattern which Jehovah had shown Moses, so he made the lampstand.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Take the Levites from among the sons of Israel,  cleanse them.
thus thou shall do to them to cleanse them: sprinkle the water of expiation upon them,  let them cause a razor to pass over all their flesh,  let them wash their clothes,  cleanse themselves.
Then let them take a young bullock,  its meal offering-fine flour mingled with oil. And thou shall take another young bullock for a sin offering.
thou shall present the Levites before the tent of meeting. And thou shall assemble the whole congregation of the sons of Israel,
thou shall present the Levites before Jehovah. And the sons of Israel shall lay their hands upon the Levites.
Aaron shall offer the Levites before Jehovah for a wave offering on the behalf of the sons of Israel, that it may be theirs to do the service of Jehovah.
the Levites shall lay their hands upon the heads of the bullocks,  offer thou the one for a sin offering,  the other for a burnt offering, to Jehovah, to make atonement for the Levites.
thou shall set the Levites before Aaron,  before his sons,  offer them for a wave offering to Jehovah.
Thus shall thou separate the Levites from among the sons of Israel,  the Levites shall be mine.
after that the Levites shall go in to do the service of the tent of meeting. And thou shall cleanse them,  offer them for a wave offering.
For they are wholly given to me from among the sons of Israel; instead of all who open the womb, even the firstborn of all the sons of Israel, I have taken them to me.
For all the firstborn among the sons of Israel are mine, both man and beast. On the day that I smote all the firstborn in the land of Egypt I sanctified them for myself.
I have taken the Levites instead of all the firstborn among the sons of Israel.
I have given the Levites as a gift to Aaron and to his sons from among the sons of Israel, to do the service of the sons of Israel in the tent of meeting,  to make atonement for the sons of Israel, that there be no plague among the sons of Israel, when the sons of Israel come near to the sanctuary.
Thus did Moses,  Aaron,  all the congregation of the sons of Israel, to the Levites. According to all that Jehovah commanded Moses concerning the Levites, so the sons of Israel did to them.
the Levites purified themselves from sin,  they washed their clothes. And Aaron offered them for a wave offering before Jehovah,  Aaron made atonement for them to cleanse them.
after that the Levites went in to do their service in the tent of meeting before Aaron,  before his sons. As Jehovah had commanded Moses concerning the Levites, so they did to them.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
This is that which belongs to the Levites: From twenty-five years old and upward they shall go in to wait upon the service in the work of the tent of meeting.
from the age of fifty years they shall cease waiting upon the work,  shall serve no more,
but shall minister with their brothers in the tent of meeting, to keep the charge,  shall do no service. Thus shall thou do to the Levites concerning their charges.
Jehovah spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, in the first month of the second year after they came out of the land of Egypt, saying,
Moreover let the sons of Israel keep the Passover in its appointed season.
In the fourteenth day of this month, at evening, ye shall keep it in its appointed season. According to all the statutes of it,  according to all the ordinances of it, ye shall keep it.
Moses spoke to the sons of Israel, that they should keep the Passover.
they kept the Passover in the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month, at evening, in the wilderness of Sinai. According to all that Jehovah commanded Moses, so did the sons of Israel.
there were certain men who were unclean by reason of the dead body of a man, so that they could not keep the Passover on that day. And they came before Moses and before Aaron on that day,
those men said to him, We are unclean by reason of the dead body of a man. Why are we kept back, that we may not offer the oblation of Jehovah in its appointed season among the sons of Israel?
Moses said to them, Stay ye, that I may hear what Jehovah will command concerning you.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel, saying, If any man of you or of your generations shall be unclean by reason of a dead body, or be on a journey afar off, yet he shall keep the Passover to Jehovah.
In the second month on the fourteenth day at evening they shall keep it. They shall eat it with unleavened bread and bitter herbs.
They shall leave none of it to the morning, nor break a bone of it. According to all the statute of the Passover they shall keep it.
But the man who is clean,  is not on a journey,  forbears to keep the Passover, that soul shall be cut off from his people, because he did not offer the oblation of Jehovah in its appointed season; that man shall bear his sin.
if a stranger shall sojourn among you,  will keep the Passover to Jehovah, according to the statute of the Passover,  according to the ordinance of it, so shall he do. Ye shall have one statute, both for the sojourner,  for him who is born in the land.
on the day that the tabernacle was reared up the cloud covered the tabernacle, even the tent of the testimony,  at evening it was upon the tabernacle, as it were the appearance of fire, until morning.
So it was always: the cloud covered it,  the appearance of fire by night.
whenever the cloud was taken up from over the tent, then after that the sons of Israel journeyed. And in the place where the cloud abode, there the sons of Israel encamped.
At the commandment of Jehovah the sons of Israel journeyed,  at the commandment of Jehovah they encamped. As long as the cloud abode upon the tabernacle they remained encamped.
when the cloud tarried upon the tabernacle many days, then the sons of Israel kept the charge of Jehovah,  did not journey.
sometimes the cloud was a few days upon the tabernacle, then according to the commandment of Jehovah they remained encamped,  according to the commandment of Jehovah they journeyed.
sometimes the cloud was from evening until morning,  when the cloud was taken up in the morning, they journeyed, or if by day and by night, when the cloud was taken up, they journeyed.
Whether it was two days, or a month, or a year, that the cloud tarried upon the tabernacle, abiding on it, the sons of Israel remained encamped,  did not journey,  when it was taken up, they journeyed.
At the commandment of Jehovah they encamped,  at the commandment of Jehovah they journeyed. They kept the charge of Jehovah, at the commandment of Jehovah by Moses.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Make thee two trumpets of silver, of beaten work thou shall make them. And thou shall use them for the calling of the congregation,  for the journeying of the camps.
when they shall blow them, all the congregation shall gather themselves to thee at the door of the tent of meeting.
if they blow but one, then the rulers, the heads of the thousands of Israel, shall gather themselves to thee.
when ye blow an alarm, the camps that lie on the east side shall take their journey.
when ye blow an alarm the second time, the camps that lie on the south side shall take their journey. They shall blow an alarm for their journeys.
But when the assembly is to be gathered together, ye shall blow,  ye shall not sound an alarm.
the sons of Aaron, the priests, shall blow the trumpets,  they shall be to you for a statute forever throughout your generations.
when ye go to war in your land against the adversary that oppresses you, then ye shall sound an alarm with the trumpets. And ye shall be remembered before Jehovah your God,  ye shall be saved from your enemies.
Also in the day of your gladness,  in your set feasts,  in the beginnings of your months, ye shall blow the trumpets over your burnt offerings,  over the sacrifices of your peace offerings. And they shall be to you for a memorial before your God: I am Jehovah your God.
it came to pass in the second year, in the second month, on the twentieth day of the month, that the cloud was taken up from over the tabernacle of the testimony.
the sons of Israel set forward according to their journeys out of the wilderness of Sinai,  the cloud abode in the wilderness of Paran.
they first took their journey according to the commandment of Jehovah by Moses.
in the first place the standard of the camp of the sons of Judah set forward according to their armies,  over his army was Nahshon the son of Amminadab.
over the army of the tribe of the sons of Issachar was Nethanel the son of Zuar.
over the army of the tribe of the sons of Zebulun was Eliab the son of Helon.
the tabernacle was taken down,  the sons of Gershon and the sons of Merari, who bore the tabernacle, set forward.
the standard of the camp of Reuben set forward according to their armies,  over his army was Elizur the son of Shedeur.
over the army of the tribe of the sons of Simeon was Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai.
over the army of the tribe of the sons of Gad was Eliasaph the son of Deuel.
the Kohathites set forward, bearing the sanctuary,  the others set up the tabernacle until their coming.
the standard of the camp of the sons of Ephraim set forward according to their armies,  over his army was Elishama the son of Ammihud.
over the army of the tribe of the sons of Manasseh was Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur.
over the army of the tribe of the sons of Benjamin was Abidan the son of Gideoni.
the standard of the camp of the sons of Dan, which was the rearward of all the camps, set forward according to their armies,  over his army was Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai.
over the army of the tribe of the sons of Asher was Pagiel the son of Ochran.
over the army of the tribe of the sons of Naphtali was Ahira the son of Enan.
Thus were the journeys of the sons of Israel according to their armies,  they set forward.
Moses said to Hobab, the son of Reuel the Midianite, Moses' father-in-law, We are journeying to the place of which Jehovah said, I will give it to you. Come thou with us,  we will do thee good, for Jehovah has spoken good concerning Israel.
he said to him, I will not go,  I will depart to my own land,  to my kindred.
he said, Leave us not, I pray thee, inasmuch as thou know how we are to encamp in the wilderness,  thou shall be to us instead of eyes.
it shall be, if thou go with us, yea, it shall be, that whatever good Jehovah shall do to us, the same we will do to thee.
they set forward from the mount of Jehovah three days' journey. And the ark of the covenant of Jehovah went before them three days' journey, to seek out a resting-place for them.
the cloud of Jehovah was over them by day when they set forward from the camp.
it came to pass, when the ark set forward, that Moses said, Rise up, O Jehovah,  let thine enemies be scattered,  let those who hate thee flee before thee.
when it rested, he said, Return, O Jehovah, to the ten thousands of the thousands of Israel.
the people were as murmurers, speaking evil in the ears of Jehovah. And when Jehovah heard it, his anger was kindled,  the fire of Jehovah burnt among them,  devoured in the outermost part of the camp.
the people cried to Moses. And Moses prayed to Jehovah,  the fire abated.
the name of that place was called Taberah, because the fire of Jehovah burnt among them.
the mixed multitude that was among them lusted exceedingly. And the sons of Israel also wept again,  said, Who shall give us flesh to eat?
We remember the fish which we ate in Egypt for nothing, the cucumbers,  the melons,  the leeks,  the onions,  the garlic,
but now our soul is dried away. There is nothing at all except this manna to look upon.
the manna was like coriander seed,  the appearance of it as the appearance of bdellium.
The people went about,  gathered it,  ground it in mills, or beat it in mortars,  boiled it in pots,  made cakes of it. And the taste of it was as the taste of fresh oil.
when the dew fell upon the camp in the night, the manna fell upon it.
Moses heard the people weeping throughout their families, every man at the door of his tent. And the anger of Jehovah was kindled greatly,  Moses was displeased.
Moses said to Jehovah, Why have thou dealt ill with thy servant? And why have I not found favor in thy sight, that thou lay the burden of all this people upon me?
Have I conceived all this people? Have I brought them forth, that thou should say to me, Carry them in thy bosom, as a nurturing father carries the sucking child, to the land which thou swore to their fathers?
From where should I have flesh to give to all this people? For they weep to me, saying, Give us flesh, that we may eat.
I am not able to bear all this people alone, because it is too heavy for me.
if thou deal thus with me, kill me, I pray thee, out of hand, if I have found favor in thy sight,  let me not see my wretchedness.
Jehovah said to Moses, Gather to me seventy men of the elders of Israel, whom thou know to be the elders of the people and officers over them. And bring them to the tent of meeting, that they may stand there with thee.
I will come down and talk with thee there. And I will take of the spirit which is upon thee,  will put it upon them,  they shall bear the burden of the people with thee, that thou not bear it thyself alone.
say thou to the people, Sanctify yourselves against tomorrow,  ye shall eat flesh, for ye have wept in the ears of Jehovah, saying, Who shall give us flesh to eat? For it was well with us in Egypt. Therefore Jehovah will give you flesh,  ye shall eat.
Ye shall not eat one day, nor two days, nor five days, neither ten days, nor twenty days,
but a whole month, until it comes out at your nostrils,  it be loathsome to you, because ye have rejected Jehovah who is among you,  have wept before him, saying, Why did we come forth out of Egypt?
Moses said, The people, among whom I am, are six hundred thousand footmen,  thou have said, I will give them flesh, that they may eat a whole month.
Shall flocks and herds be slain for them, to suffice them? Or shall all the fish of the sea be gathered together for them, to suffice them?
Jehovah said to Moses, Is Jehovah's hand grown short? Now thou shall see whether my word shall come to pass to thee or not.
Moses went out,  told the people the words of Jehovah. And he gathered seventy men of the elders of the people,  set them round about the tent.
Jehovah came down in the cloud,  spoke to him,  took of the spirit that was upon him,  put it upon the seventy elders. And it came to pass, that, when the spirit rested upon them, they prophesied,  they did so no more.
But there remained two men in the camp, the name of the one was Eldad,  the name of the other Medad. And the spirit rested upon them. And they were of those who were written,  had not gone out to the tent. And they prophesied in the camp.
a young man ran,  told Moses,  said, Eldad and Medad do prophesy in the camp.
Joshua the son of Nun, the minister of Moses, one of his chosen men, answered and said, My lord Moses, forbid them.
Moses said to him, Are thou jealous for my sake? Would that all of Jehovah's people were prophets, that Jehovah would put his spirit upon them!
Moses went into the camp, he and the elders of Israel.
there went forth a wind from Jehovah,  brought quails from the sea,  let them fall by the camp, about a day's journey on this side,  a day's journey on the other side, round about the camp,  about two cubits above the face of the earth.
the people rose up all that day,  all the night,  all the next day,  gathered the quails. He who gathered least gathered ten homers. And they spread them all abroad for themselves round about the camp.
While the flesh was yet between their teeth, before it was chewed, the anger of Jehovah was kindled against the people,  Jehovah smote the people with a very great plague.
the name of that place was called Kibrothhattaavah, because there they buried the people who lusted.
From Kibrothhattaavah the people journeyed to Hazeroth,  they abode at Hazeroth.
Miriam and Aaron spoke against Moses because of the Cushite woman whom he had married, for he had married a Cushite woman.
they said, Has Jehovah indeed spoken only with Moses? Has he not spoken also with us? And Jehovah heard it.
Now the man Moses was very meek, above all the men who were upon the face of the earth.
Jehovah spoke suddenly to Moses,  to Aaron,  to Miriam, Come out ye three to the tent of meeting. And the three came out.
Jehovah came down in a pillar of cloud,  stood at the door of the tent,  called Aaron and Miriam. And they both came forth.
he said, Hear now my words. If there be a prophet among you, I Jehovah will make myself known to him in a vision. I will speak with him in a dream.
My servant Moses is not so. He is faithful in all my house.
With him I will speak mouth to mouth, even manifestly,  not in dark speeches,  he has beheld the form of Jehovah. Why then were ye not afraid to speak against my servant, against Moses?
the anger of Jehovah was kindled against them,  he departed.
the cloud removed from over the tent. And, behold, Miriam was leprous, as snow. And Aaron looked upon Miriam, , behold, she was leprous.
Aaron said to Moses, Oh, my lord, lay not, I pray thee, sin upon us, in which we have done foolishly,  in which we have sinned.
Let her not, I pray, be as one dead, of whom the flesh is half consumed when he comes out of his mother's womb.
Moses cried to Jehovah, saying, Heal her, O God, I beseech thee.
Jehovah said to Moses, If her father had but spit in her face, should she not be ashamed seven days? Let her be shut up outside the camp seven days,  after that she shall be brought in again.
Miriam was shut up outside the camp seven days. And the people journeyed not till Miriam was brought in again.
afterward the people journeyed from Hazeroth,  encamped in the wilderness of Paran.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Send thou men, that they may spy out the land of Canaan, which I give to the sons of Israel. From every tribe of their fathers ye shall send a man, each one a ruler among them.
Moses sent them from the wilderness of Paran according to the commandment of Jehovah. All of them men who were heads of the sons of Israel.
these were their names: of the tribe of Reuben, Shammua the son of Zaccur;
of the tribe of Simeon, Shaphat the son of Hori;
of the tribe of Judah, Caleb the son of Jephunneh;
of the tribe of Issachar, Igal the son of Joseph;
of the tribe of Ephraim, Hoshea the son of Nun;
of the tribe of Benjamin, Palti the son of Raphu;
of the tribe of Zebulun, Gaddiel the son of Sodi;
of the tribe of Joseph, namely, of the tribe of Manasseh, Gaddi the son of Susi;
of the tribe of Dan, Ammiel the son of Gemalli;
of the tribe of Asher, Sethur the son of Michael;
of the tribe of Naphtali, Nahbi the son of Vophsi;
of the tribe of Gad, Geuel the son of Machi.
These are the names of the men that Moses sent to spy out the land. And Moses called Hoshea the son of Nun Joshua.
Moses sent them to spy out the land of Canaan,  said to them, Get you up this way by the South,  go up into the hill-country.
see the land, what it is,  the people who dwell in it, whether they are strong or weak, whether they are few or many,
what the land is that they dwell in, whether it is good or bad,  what cities they are that they dwell in, whether in camps, or in strongholds,
what the land is, whether it is fat or lean, whether there is wood in it, or not. And be ye of good courage,  bring of the fruit of the land. Now the time was the time of the first-ripe grapes.
So they went up,  spied out the land from the wilderness of Zin to Rehob, to the entrance of Hamath.
they went up by the South,  came to Hebron. And Ahiman, Sheshai,  Talmai, the sons of Anak, were there. (Now Hebron was built seven years before Zoan in Egypt.)
they came to the valley of Eshcol,  cut down from there a branch with one cluster of grapes,  they bore it upon a staff between two, also of the pomegranates,  of the figs.
That place was called the valley of Eshcol, because of the cluster which the sons of Israel cut down from there.
they returned from spying out the land at the end of forty days.
they went and came to Moses,  to Aaron,  to all the congregation of the sons of Israel, to the wilderness of Paran, to Kadesh,  brought back word to them,  to all the congregation,  showed them the fruit of the land.
they told him,  said, We came to the land where thou sent us. And surely it flows with milk and honey,  this is the fruit of it.
However the people who dwell in the land are strong,  the cities are fortified, very great,  moreover we saw the sons of Anak there.
Amalek dwells in the land of the South. And the Hittite,  the Jebusite,  the Amorite, dwell in the hill-country. And the Canaanite dwells by the sea,  along by the side of the Jordan.
Caleb stilled the people before Moses,  said, Let us go up at once,  possess it, for we are well able to overcome it.
But the men who went up with him said, We are not able to go up against the people, for they are stronger than we.
they brought up an evil report of the land which they had spied out to the sons of Israel, saying, The land, through which we have gone to spy it out, is a land that eats up the inhabitants of it. And all the people that we saw in it are men of great stature.
we saw there the giants, the sons of Anak, who come of the giants. And we were in our own sight as grasshoppers,  so we were in their sight.
all the congregation lifted up their voice,  cried,  the people wept that night.
all the sons of Israel murmured against Moses and against Aaron. And the whole congregation said to them, Would that we had died in the land of Egypt, or would that we had died in this wilderness!
why does Jehovah bring us to this land, to fall by the sword? Our wives and our little ones will be a prey. Were it not better for us to return into Egypt?
they said one to another, Let us make a captain,  let us return into Egypt.
Then Moses and Aaron fell on their faces before all the assembly of the congregation of the sons of Israel.
Joshua the son of Nun and Caleb the son of Jephunneh, who were of those who spied out the land, tore their clothes.
they spoke to all the congregation of the sons of Israel, saying, The land, which we passed through to spy it out, is an exceedingly good land.
If Jehovah delights in us, then he will bring us into this land,  give it to us, a land which flows with milk and honey.
Only do not rebel against Jehovah, neither fear ye the people of the land, for they are bread for us. Their defense is removed from over them,  Jehovah is with us. Fear them not.
But all the congregation bade stone them with stones. And the glory of Jehovah appeared in the tent of meeting to all the sons of Israel.
Jehovah said to Moses, How long will this people despise me? And how long will they not believe in me, for all the signs which I have wrought among them?
I will smite them with the pestilence,  disinherit them,  will make of thee a nation greater and mightier than they.
Moses said to Jehovah, Then the Egyptians will hear it, for thou brought up this people in thy might from among them,
they will tell it to the inhabitants of this land. They have heard that thou Jehovah are in the midst of this people, for thou Jehovah are seen face to face,  thy cloud stands over them,  thou go before them, in a pillar of cloud by day,  in a pillar of fire by night.
Now if thou shall kill this people as one man, then the nations which have heard the fame of thee will speak, saying,
Because Jehovah was not able to bring this people into the land which he swore to them, therefore he has slain them in the wilderness.
now, I pray thee, let the power of the Lord be great, according as thou have spoken, saying,
Jehovah is slow to anger,  abundant in loving kindness, forgiving iniquity and transgression,  that will by no means clear the guilty, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the sons, upon the third and upon the fourth generation.
Pardon, I pray thee, the iniquity of this people according to the greatness of thy loving kindness,  according as thou have forgiven this people, from Egypt even until now.
Jehovah said, I have pardoned according to thy word,
but in very deed, as I live,  as all the earth shall be filled with the glory of Jehovah,
because all those men who have seen my glory,  my signs, which I wrought in Egypt and in the wilderness, yet have challenged me these ten times,  have not hearkened to my voice,
surely they shall not see the land which I swore to their fathers, neither shall any of them who despised me see it.
But my servant Caleb, because he had another spirit with him,  has followed me fully, him will I bring into the land into which he went,  his seed shall possess it.
Now the Amalekite and the Canaanite dwell in the valley. Tomorrow turn ye,  get you into the wilderness by the way to the Red Sea.
Jehovah spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying,
How long shall I bear with this evil congregation that murmur against me? I have heard the murmurings of the sons of Israel, which they murmur against me.
Say to them, As I live, says Jehovah, surely as ye have spoken in my ears, so will I do to you.
Your dead bodies shall fall in this wilderness. And all who were numbered of you, according to your whole number, from twenty years old and upward, who have murmured against me,
surely ye shall not come into the land, concerning which I swore that I would make you dwell in it, except Caleb the son of Jephunneh,  Joshua the son of Nun.
But your little ones, that ye said would be a prey, them I will bring in,  they shall know the land which ye have rejected.
But as for you, your dead bodies shall fall in this wilderness.
your sons shall be wanderers in the wilderness forty years,  shall bear your whoredoms, until your dead bodies be consumed in the wilderness.
After the number of the days in which ye spied out the land, even forty days, for every day a year, ye shall bear your iniquities, even forty years,  ye shall know my alienation.
I, Jehovah, have spoken, surely I will do this to all this evil congregation that are gathered together against me. In this wilderness they shall be consumed,  there they shall die.
the men, whom Moses sent to spy out the land, who returned,  made all the congregation to murmur against him by bringing up an evil report against the land,
even those men who brought up an evil report of the land, died by the plague before Jehovah.
But Joshua the son of Nun,  Caleb the son of Jephunneh, remained alive of those men who went to spy out the land.
Moses told these words to all the sons of Israel,  the people mourned greatly.
they rose up early in the morning,  got up to the top of the mountain, saying, Lo, we are here,  will go up to the place which Jehovah has promised, for we have sinned.
Moses said, Why do ye now transgress the commandment of Jehovah, seeing it shall not prosper?
Do not go up, for Jehovah is not among you, that ye be not smitten down before your enemies.
For there the Amalekite and the Canaanite are before you,  ye shall fall by the sword. Because ye have turned back from following Jehovah, therefore Jehovah will not be with you.
But they presumed to go up to the top of the mountain, nevertheless the ark of the covenant of Jehovah,  Moses, did not depart out of the camp.
Then the Amalekites came down,  the Canaanites who dwelt in that mountain,  smote them and beat them down, even to Hormah.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel,  say to them, When ye come into the land of your habitations, which I give to you,
will make an offering by fire to Jehovah, a burnt offering, or a sacrifice, to accomplish a vow, or as a freewill offering, or in your set feasts, to make a sweet savor to Jehovah, of the herd, or of the flock,
then he who offers his oblation shall offer to Jehovah a meal offering of a tenth part of an ephah of fine flour mingled with the fourth part of a hin of oil.
wine for the drink offering, the fourth part of a hin, thou shall prepare with the burnt offering, or for the sacrifice, for each lamb.
Or for a ram, thou shall prepare for a meal offering two tenth parts of an ephah of fine flour mingled with the third part of a hin of oil.
for the drink offering thou shall offer the third part of a hin of wine, of a sweet savor to Jehovah.
when thou prepare a bullock for a burnt offering, or for a sacrifice, to accomplish a vow, or for peace offerings to Jehovah;
then he shall offer with the bullock a meal offering of three tenth parts of an ephah of fine flour mingled with half a hin of oil.
thou shall offer for the drink offering half a hin of wine, for an offering made by fire, of a sweet savor to Jehovah.
Thus shall it be done for each bullock, or for each ram, or for each of the he-lambs, or of the kids.
According to the number that ye shall prepare, so shall ye do to every one according to their number.
All who are home-born shall do these things after this manner, in offering an offering made by fire, of a sweet savor to Jehovah.
if a stranger sojourns with you, or whoever may be among you throughout your generations,  will offer an offering made by fire, of a sweet savor to Jehovah; as ye do, so he shall do.
For the assembly, there shall be one statute for you,  for the stranger who sojourns with you, a statute forever throughout your generations. As ye are, so shall the sojourner be before Jehovah.
One law and one ordinance shall be for you,  for the stranger who sojourns with you.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel,  say to them, When ye come into the land where I bring you,
then it shall be, that, when ye eat of the bread of the land, ye shall offer up a heave offering to Jehovah.
Of the first of your dough ye shall offer up a cake for a heave offering, as the heave offering of the threshing-floor, so shall ye heave it.
Of the first of your dough ye shall give to Jehovah a heave offering throughout your generations.
when ye shall err,  not observe all these commandments, which Jehovah has spoken to Moses,
even all that Jehovah has commanded you by Moses, from the day that Jehovah gave commandment,  onward throughout your generations,
then it shall be, if it be done unwittingly, without the knowledge of the congregation, that all the congregation shall offer one young bullock for a burnt offering, for a sweet savor to Jehovah, with the meal offering of it,  the drink offering of it, according to the ordinance,  one he-goat for a sin offering.
the priest shall make atonement for all the congregation of the sons of Israel,  they shall be forgiven, for it was an error,  they have brought their oblation, an offering made by fire to Jehovah,  their sin offering before Jehovah, for their error.
all the congregation of the sons of Israel shall be forgiven,  the stranger who sojourns among them, for in respect of all the people it was done unwittingly.
if one soul sins unwittingly, then he shall offer a she-goat a year old for a sin offering.
the priest shall make atonement for the soul that errs, when he sins unwittingly, before Jehovah, to make atonement for him,  he shall be forgiven.
Ye shall have one law for him who does anything unwittingly, for him who is home-born among the sons of Israel,  for the stranger who sojourns among them.
But the soul that does anything with a high hand, whether he be home-born or a sojourner, the same blasphemes Jehovah,  that soul shall be cut off from among his people.
Because he has despised the word of Jehovah,  has broken his commandment, that soul shall utterly be cut off; his iniquity shall be upon him.
while the sons of Israel were in the wilderness, they found a man gathering sticks upon the sabbath day.
those who found him gathering sticks brought him to Moses and Aaron,  to all the congregation.
they put him in ward, because it had not been declared what should be done to him.
Jehovah said to Moses, The man shall surely be put to death. All the congregation shall stone him with stones outside the camp.
all the congregation brought him outside the camp,  stoned him to death with stones, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel,  bid them that they make for them hems in the borders of their garments throughout their generations,  that they put upon the hem of each border a cord of blue.
it shall be to you for a hem, that ye may look upon it,  remember all the commandments of Jehovah,  do them,  that ye not follow after your own heart and your own eyes, after which ye use to play the harlot,
that ye may remember and do all my commandments,  be holy to your God.
I am Jehovah your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt, to be your God. I am Jehovah your God.
Now Korah, the son of Izhar, the son of Kohath, the son of Levi, with Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab,  On, the son of Peleth, sons of Reuben, took,
they rose up before Moses, with certain of the sons of Israel, two hundred and fifty rulers of the congregation, called to the assembly, men of renown,
they assembled themselves together against Moses and against Aaron,  said to them, Ye take too much upon you, since all the congregation are holy, every one of them,  Jehovah is among them. Why then do ye lift up yourselves above the assembly of Jehovah?
when Moses heard it, he fell upon his face.
he spoke to Korah and to all his company, saying, In the morning Jehovah will show who are his,  who is holy,  will cause him to come near to him, even him whom he shall choose will he cause to come near to him.
This do: Take you censers, Korah,  all his company,
put fire in them,  put incense upon them before Jehovah tomorrow. And it shall be that the man whom Jehovah chooses, he is holy. Ye take too much upon you, ye sons of Levi.
Moses said to Korah, Hear now, ye sons of Levi.
Is it a small thing to you, that the God of Israel has separated you from the congregation of Israel, to bring you near to himself, to do the service of the tabernacle of Jehovah,  to stand before the congregation to minister to them,
that he has brought thee near,  all thy brothers the sons of Levi with thee? And ye seek the priesthood also?
Therefore thou and all thy company are gathered together against Jehovah. And Aaron, what is he that ye murmur against him?
Moses sent to call Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab. And they said, We will not come up.
Is it a small thing that thou have brought us up out of a land flowing with milk and honey, to kill us in the wilderness,  thou must make thyself also a ruler over us?
Moreover thou have not brought us into a land flowing with milk and honey, nor given us inheritance of fields and vineyards. Will thou put out the eyes of these men? We will not come up.
Moses was very angry,  said to Jehovah, Do not respect thou their offering. I have not taken one donkey from them, neither have I hurt one of them.
Moses said to Korah, Be thou and all thy company before Jehovah, thou,  they,  Aaron, tomorrow.
take ye every man his censer,  put incense upon them,  bring ye before Jehovah every man his censer, two hundred and fifty censers, thou also,  Aaron, each his censer.
they took every man his censer,  put fire in them,  laid incense on it,  stood at the door of the tent of meeting with Moses and Aaron.
Korah assembled all the congregation against them to the door of the tent of meeting. And the glory of Jehovah appeared to all the congregation.
Jehovah spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying,
Separate yourselves from among this congregation, that I may consume them in a moment.
they fell upon their faces,  said, O God, the God of the spirits of all flesh, shall one man sin,  will thou be angry with all the congregation?
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the congregation, saying, Get you up from about the tabernacle of Korah, Dathan,  Abiram.
Moses rose up and went to Dathan and Abiram,  the elders of Israel followed him.
he spoke to the congregation, saying, Depart, I pray you, from the tents of these wicked men,  touch nothing of theirs, lest ye be consumed in all their sins.
So they got up from the tabernacle of Korah, Dathan,  Abiram, on every side. And Dathan and Abiram came out,  stood at the door of their tents,  their wives,  their sons,  their little ones.
Moses said, Hereby ye shall know that Jehovah has sent me to do all these works, for it is not of my own mind.
If these men die the common death of all men, or if they be visited after the visitation of all men, then Jehovah has not sent me.
But if Jehovah makes a new thing,  the ground opens its mouth,  swallows them up, with all that pertains to them,  they go down alive into Sheol, then ye shall understand that these men have despised Jehovah.
it came to pass, as he made an end of speaking all these words, that the ground split asunder that was under them,
the earth opened its mouth,  swallowed them up,  their households,  all the men that pertained to Korah,  all their goods.
So they,  all that pertained to them, went down alive into Sheol. And the earth closed upon them,  they perished from among the assembly.
all Israel that were round about them fled at the cry of them, for they said, Lest the earth swallow us up.
fire came forth from Jehovah,  devoured the two hundred and fifty men who offered the incense.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest, that he take up the censers out of the burning,  scatter thou the fire yonder, for they are holy,
even the censers of these sinners against their own lives,  let them be made beaten plates for a covering of the altar, for they offered them before Jehovah, therefore they are holy,  they shall be a sign to the sons of Israel.
Eleazar the priest took the brazen censers, which those who were burnt had offered,  they beat them out for a covering of the altar,
to be a memorial to the sons of Israel, to the end that no stranger, who is not of the seed of Aaron, come near to burn incense before Jehovah, that he not be as Korah,  as his company, as Jehovah spoke to him by Moses.
But on the morrow all the congregation of the sons of Israel murmured against Moses and against Aaron, saying, Ye have killed the people of Jehovah.
it came to pass, when the congregation was assembled against Moses and against Aaron, that they looked toward the tent of meeting, , behold, the cloud covered it,  the glory of Jehovah appeared.
Moses and Aaron came to the front of the tent of meeting.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Get you up from among this congregation, that I may consume them in a moment. And they fell upon their faces.
Moses said to Aaron, Take thy censer,  put fire in it from off the altar,  lay incense on it,  carry it quickly to the congregation,  make atonement for them, for there is wrath gone out from Jehovah. The plague has begun.
Aaron took as Moses spoke,  ran into the midst of the assembly. And, behold, the plague had begun among the people. And he put on the incense,  made atonement for the people.
he stood between the dead and the living,  the plague was stopped.
Now those who died by the plague were fourteen thousand and seven hundred, besides those who died about the matter of Korah.
Aaron returned to Moses to the door of the tent of meeting,  the plague was stopped.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel,  take rods from them, one for each father's house, from all their rulers according to their fathers' houses, twelve rods. Write thou every man's name upon his rod.
thou shall write Aaron's name upon the rod of Levi, for there shall be one rod for each head of their fathers' houses.
thou shall lay them up in the tent of meeting before the testimony, where I meet with you.
it shall come to pass, that the rod of the man whom I shall choose shall bud. And I will make to cease from me the murmurings of the sons of Israel, which they murmur against you.
Moses spoke to the sons of Israel. And all their rulers gave him rods, for each ruler one, according to their fathers' houses, even twelve rods,  the rod of Aaron was among their rods.
Moses laid up the rods before Jehovah in the tent of the testimony.
it came to pass on the morrow, that Moses went into the tent of the testimony, , behold, the rod of Aaron for the house of Levi was budded,  put forth buds,  produced blossoms,  bore ripe almonds.
Moses brought out all the rods from before Jehovah to all the sons of Israel. And they looked,  took every man his rod.
Jehovah said to Moses, Put back the rod of Aaron before the testimony, to be kept for a sign against the sons of rebellion, that thou may make an end of their murmurings against me, that they not die.
Thus Moses did. As Jehovah commanded him, so he did.
the sons of Israel spoke to Moses, saying, Behold, we perish, we are undone, we are all undone.
Every man who comes near, who comes near to the tabernacle of Jehovah, dies. Shall we all of us perish?
Jehovah said to Aaron, Thou and thy sons and thy fathers' house with thee shall bear the iniquity of the sanctuary,  thou and thy sons with thee shall bear the iniquity of your priesthood.
thy brothers also, the tribe of Levi, the tribe of thy father, bring thou near with thee, that they may be joined to thee,  minister to thee,  thou and thy sons with thee shall be before the tent of the testimony.
they shall keep thy charge,  the charge of all the tent. Only they shall not come near to the vessels of the sanctuary and to the altar, that they not die, neither they, nor ye.
they shall be joined to thee,  keep the charge of the tent of meeting, for all the service of the tent,  a stranger shall not come near to you.
ye shall keep the charge of the sanctuary,  the charge of the altar, that there be no more wrath upon the sons of Israel.
I, behold, I have taken your brothers the Levites from among the sons of Israel. They are a gift to you, given to Jehovah, to do the service of the tent of meeting.
thou and thy sons with thee shall keep your priesthood for everything of the altar,  for that within the veil,  ye shall serve. I give you the priesthood as a service of gift. And the stranger who comes near shall be put to death.
Jehovah spoke to Aaron, And I, behold, I have given thee the charge of my heave offerings, even all the hallowed things of the sons of Israel. I have given them to thee by reason of the anointing,  to thy sons, as a portion forever.
This shall be thine of the most holy things, reserved from the fire: every oblation of theirs, even every meal offering of theirs,  every sin offering of theirs,  every trespass offering of theirs, which they shall render to me, shall be most holy for thee and for thy sons.
As the most holy things thou shall eat of it; every male shall eat of it. It shall be holy to thee.
this is thine: the heave offering of their gift, even all the wave offerings of the sons of Israel. I have given them to thee,  to thy sons and to thy daughters with thee, as a portion forever. Everyone who is clean in thy house shall eat of it.
All the best of the oil,  all the best of the vintage,  of the grain, the first-fruits of them which they give to Jehovah, I have given them to thee.
The first-ripe fruits of all that is in their land, which they bring to Jehovah, shall be thine. Everyone who is clean in thy house shall eat of it.
Everything devoted in Israel shall be thine.
Everything that opens the womb, of all flesh which they offer to Jehovah, both of man and beast shall be thine. Nevertheless the firstborn of man thou shall surely redeem,  the firstling of unclean beasts thou shall redeem.
those that are to be redeemed of them from a month old shall thou redeem, according to thine estimation, for the money of five shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary (the same is twenty gerahs).
But the firstling of an ox, or the firstling of a sheep, or the firstling of a goat, thou shall not redeem. They are holy. Thou shall sprinkle their blood upon the altar,  shall burn their fat for an offering made by fire, for a sweet savor to Jehovah.
the flesh of them shall be thine. As the wave-breast and as the right thigh, it shall be thine.
All the heave offerings of the holy things, which the sons of Israel offer to Jehovah, I have given thee,  thy sons and thy daughters with thee, as a portion forever. It is a covenant of salt forever before Jehovah to thee and to thy seed with thee.
Jehovah said to Aaron, Thou shall have no inheritance in their land, neither shall thou have any portion among them. I am thy portion and thine inheritance among the sons of Israel.
to the sons of Levi, behold, I have given all the tithe in Israel for an inheritance, in return for their service which they serve, even the service of the tent of meeting.
henceforth the sons of Israel shall not come near the tent of meeting, lest they bear sin,  die.
But the Levites shall do the service of the tent of meeting,  they shall bear their iniquity. It shall be a statute forever throughout your generations. And among the sons of Israel they shall have no inheritance.
For the tithe of the sons of Israel, which they offer as a heave offering to Jehovah, I have given to the Levites for an inheritance. Therefore I have said to them, Among the sons of Israel they shall have no inheritance.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Moreover thou shall speak to the Levites,  say to them, When ye take from the sons of Israel the tithe which I have given you from them for your inheritance, then ye shall offer up a heave offering of it for Jehovah, a tithe of the tithe.
your heave offering shall be reckoned to you, as though it were the grain of the threshing-floor,  as the fullness of the winepress.
Thus ye also shall offer a heave offering to Jehovah of all your tithes, which ye receive of the sons of Israel. And from it ye shall give Jehovah's heave offering to Aaron the priest.
Out of all your gifts ye shall offer every heave offering of Jehovah, of all the best of it, even the hallowed part of it out of it.
Therefore thou shall say to them, When ye heave the best of it from it, then it shall be reckoned to the Levites as the increase of the threshing-floor,  as the increase of the wine-press.
ye shall eat it in every place, ye and your households, for it is your reward in return for your service in the tent of meeting.
ye shall bear no sin by reason of it, when ye have heaved from it the best of it. And ye shall not profane the holy things of the sons of Israel, that ye not die.
Jehovah spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying,
This is the statute of the law which Jehovah has commanded, saying, Speak to the sons of Israel, that they bring thee a red heifer without spot, in which is no blemish,  upon which a yoke never came.
ye shall give her to Eleazar the priest,  he shall bring her forth outside the camp,  she shall be killed before his face.
Eleazar the priest shall take of her blood with his finger,  sprinkle her blood toward the front of the tent of meeting seven times.
the heifer shall be burned in his sight: her skin,  her flesh,  her blood, with her dung, he shall burn.
the priest shall take cedar-wood,  hyssop,  scarlet,  cast it into the midst of the burning of the heifer.
Then the priest shall wash his clothes,  he shall bathe his flesh in water. And afterward he shall come into the camp,  the priest shall be unclean until the evening.
he who burned her shall wash his clothes in water,  bathe his flesh in water,  shall be unclean until the evening.
a man who is clean shall gather up the ashes of the heifer,  lay them up outside the camp in a clean place. And it shall be kept for the congregation of the sons of Israel for a water for impurity. It is a sin offering.
he who gathers the ashes of the heifer shall wash his clothes,  be unclean until the evening. And it shall be to the sons of Israel,  to the stranger who sojourns among them, for a statute forever.
He who touches the dead body of any man shall be unclean seven days.
The same shall purify himself with it on the third day,  on the seventh day he shall be clean,  if he does not purify himself the third day, then the seventh day he shall not be clean.
Whoever touches a dead person, the body of a man who has died,  does not purify himself, defiles the tabernacle of Jehovah. And that soul shall be cut off from Israel, because the water for impurity was not sprinkled upon him. He shall be unclean; his uncleanness is yet upon him.
This is the law when a man dies in a tent: everyone who comes into the tent,  everyone who is in the tent, shall be unclean seven days.
every open vessel, which has no covering bound upon it, is unclean.
whoever in the open field touches a man who is slain with a sword, or a dead body, or a bone of a man, or a grave, shall be unclean seven days.
for the unclean they shall take of the ashes of the burning of the sin offering,  running water shall be put with that in a vessel.
a clean man shall take hyssop,  dip it in the water,  sprinkle it upon the tent,  upon all the vessels,  upon the souls who were there,  upon him who touched the bone, or the slain, or the dead, or the grave.
the clean man shall sprinkle upon the unclean on the third day,  on the seventh day. And on the seventh day he shall purify him. And he shall wash his clothes,  bathe himself in water,  shall be clean at evening.
But the man who shall be unclean,  shall not purify himself, that soul shall be cut off from the midst of the assembly, because he has defiled the sanctuary of Jehovah. The water for impurity has not been sprinkled upon him; he is unclean.
it shall be a perpetual statute to them. And he who sprinkles the water for impurity shall wash his clothes,  he who touches the water for impurity shall be unclean until evening.
whatever the unclean man touches shall be unclean,  the soul who touches it shall be unclean until evening.
the sons of Israel, even the whole congregation, came into the wilderness of Zin in the first month,  the people abode in Kadesh. And Miriam died there,  was buried there.
there was no water for the congregation,  they assembled themselves together against Moses and against Aaron.
the people strove with Moses,  spoke, saying, Would that we had died when our brothers died before Jehovah!
why have ye brought the assembly of Jehovah into this wilderness, that we should die there, we and our beasts?
why have ye made us to come up out of Egypt, to bring us in to this evil place? It is no place of seed, or of figs, or of vines, or of pomegranates, neither is there any water to drink.
Moses and Aaron went from the presence of the assembly to the door of the tent of meeting,  fell upon their faces. And the glory of Jehovah appeared to them.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Take the rod,  assemble the congregation, thou,  Aaron thy brother,  speak ye to the rock before their eyes, that it give forth its water,  thou shall bring forth water to them out of the rock. So thou shall give the congregation and their cattle drink.
Moses took the rod from before Jehovah, as he commanded him.
Moses and Aaron gathered the assembly together before the rock,  he said to them, Hear now, ye rebels. Shall we bring forth water to you out of this rock?
Moses lifted up his hand,  smote the rock with his rod twice,  water came forth abundantly. And the congregation drank,  their cattle.
Jehovah said to Moses and Aaron, Because ye did not believe in me, to sanctify me in the eyes of the sons of Israel, therefore ye shall not bring this assembly into the land which I have given them.
These are the waters of Meribah, because the sons of Israel strove with Jehovah,  he was sanctified in them.
Moses sent messengers from Kadesh to the king of Edom, Thus says thy brother Israel, Thou know all the travail that has befallen us,
how our fathers went down into Egypt,  we dwelt in Egypt a long time. And the Egyptians dealt ill with us and our fathers.
when we cried to Jehovah, he heard our voice,  sent an agent,  brought us forth out of Egypt. And, behold, we are in Kadesh, a city in the outermost of thy border.
Let us pass, I pray thee, through thy land. We will not pass through field or through vineyard, neither will we drink of the water of the wells. We will go along the king's highway. We will not turn aside to the right hand nor to the left, until we have passed thy border.
Edom said to him, Thou shall not pass through me, lest I come out with the sword against thee.
the sons of Israel said to him, We will go up by the highway. And if we drink of thy water, I and my cattle, then will I give the price of it. Only let me, without doing anything, pass through on my feet.
he said, Thou shall not pass through. And Edom came out against him with many people,  with a strong hand.
Thus Edom refused to give Israel passage through his border. Therefore Israel turned away from him.
they journeyed from Kadesh,  the sons of Israel, even the whole congregation, came to mount Hor.
Jehovah spoke to Moses and Aaron in mount Hor, by the border of the land of Edom, saying,
Aaron shall be gathered to his people, for he shall not enter into the land which I have given to the sons of Israel, because ye rebelled against my word at the waters of Meribah.
Take Aaron and Eleazar his son,  bring them up to mount Hor,
strip Aaron of his garments,  put them upon Eleazar his son. And Aaron shall be gathered,  shall die there.
Moses did as Jehovah commanded. And they went up into mount Hor in the sight of all the congregation.
Moses stripped Aaron of his garments,  put them upon Eleazar his son. And Aaron died there on the top of the mount,  Moses and Eleazar came down from the mount.
when all the congregation saw that Aaron was dead, they wept for Aaron thirty days, even all the house of Israel.
the Canaanite, the king of Arad, who dwelt in the South, heard tell that Israel came by the way of Atharim,  he fought against Israel,  took some of them captive.
Israel vowed a vow to Jehovah,  said, If thou will indeed deliver this people into my hand, then I will utterly destroy their cities.
Jehovah hearkened to the voice of Israel,  delivered up the Canaanites. And they utterly destroyed them and their cities. And the name of the place was called Hormah.
they journeyed from mount Hor by the way to the Red Sea, to encompass the land of Edom. And the soul of the people was much discouraged because of the way.
the people spoke against God,  against Moses, Why have ye brought us up out of Egypt to die in the wilderness? For there is no bread,  there is no water,  our soul loathes this light bread.
Jehovah sent fiery serpents among the people,  they bit the people,  many people of Israel died.
the people came to Moses,  said, We have sinned, because we have spoken against Jehovah,  against thee. Pray to Jehovah, that he take away the serpents from us. And Moses prayed for the people.
Jehovah said to Moses, Make thee a fiery serpent,  set it upon a standard. And it shall come to pass, that everyone who is bitten, when he sees it, shall live.
Moses made a serpent of brass,  set it upon the standard. And it came to pass, that if a serpent had bitten any man, when he looked to the serpent of brass, he lived.
the sons of Israel journeyed,  encamped in Oboth.
they journeyed from Oboth,  encamped at Iyeabarim, in the wilderness which is before Moab, toward the sunrise.
From there they journeyed,  encamped in the valley of Zered.
From there they journeyed,  encamped on the other side of the Arnon, which is in the wilderness that comes out of the border of the Amorites, for the Arnon is the border of Moab, between Moab and the Amorites.
Therefore it is said in the book of the Wars of Jehovah, Vaheb in Suphah,  the valleys of the Arnon,
the slope of the valleys that inclines toward the dwelling of Ar,  leans upon the border of Moab.
from there they journeyed to Beer. That is the well of which Jehovah said to Moses, Gather the people together,  I will give them water.
Then Israel sang this song: Spring up, O well. Sing ye to it,
the well, which the rulers dug, which the nobles of the people dug, with the scepter,  with their staves. And from the wilderness they journeyed to Mattanah,
from Mattanah to Nahaliel,  from Nahaliel to Bamoth,
from Bamoth to the valley which is in the field of Moab, to the top of Pisgah, which looks down upon the desert.
Israel sent messengers to Sihon king of the Amorites, saying,
Let me pass through thy land. We will not turn aside into field, or into vineyard. We will not drink of the water of the wells. We will go by the king's highway, until we have passed thy border.
Sihon would not allow Israel to pass through his border,  Sihon gathered all his people together,  went out against Israel into the wilderness,  came to Jahaz,  he fought against Israel.
Israel smote him with the edge of the sword,  possessed his land from the Arnon to the Jabbok, even to the sons of Ammon, for the border of the sons of Ammon was strong.
Israel took all these cities. And Israel dwelt in all the cities of the Amorites, in Heshbon,  in all the towns of it.
For Heshbon was the city of Sihon the king of the Amorites, who had fought against the former king of Moab,  had taken all his land out of his hand, even to the Arnon.
Therefore those who speak in proverbs say, Come ye to Heshbon. Let the city of Sihon be built and established.
For a fire has gone out of Heshbon, a flame from the city of Sihon. It has devoured Ar of Moab, the lords of the high places of the Arnon.
Woe to thee, Moab! Thou are undone, O people of Chemosh. He has given his sons as fugitives,  his daughters into captivity, to Sihon king of the Amorites.
We have shot at them. Heshbon is perished even to Dibon,  we have laid waste even to Nophah, which reaches to Medeba.
Thus Israel dwelt in the land of the Amorites.
Moses sent to spy out Jazer. And they took the towns of it,  drove out the Amorites that were there.
they turned and went up by the way of Bashan. And Og the king of Bashan went out against them, he and all his people, to battle at Edrei.
Jehovah said to Moses, Fear him not, for I have delivered him into thy hand,  all his people,  his land. And thou shall do to him as thou did to Sihon king of the Amorites, who dwelt at Heshbon.
So they smote him,  his sons and all his people, until there was none left to him remaining. And they possessed his land.
the sons of Israel journeyed,  encamped in the plains of Moab beyond the Jordan at Jericho.
Balak the son of Zippor saw all that Israel had done to the Amorites.
Moab was exceedingly afraid of the people, because they were many. And Moab was distressed because of the sons of Israel.
Moab said to the elders of Midian, Now will this multitude lick up all that is round about us, as the ox licks up the grass of the field. And Balak the son of Zippor was king of Moab at that time.
he sent messengers to Balaam the son of Beor, to Pethor, which is by the River, to the land of the sons of his people, to call him, saying, Behold, a people came out from Egypt. Behold, they cover the face of the earth,  they abide opposite me.
Come now therefore, I pray thee, curse for me this people, for they are too mighty for me. Perhaps I shall prevail, that we may smite them,  that I may drive them out of the land. For I know that he whom thou bless is blessed,  he whom thou curse is cursed.
the elders of Moab and the elders of Midian departed with the rewards of divination in their hand,  they came to Balaam,  spoke to him the words of Balak.
he said to them, Lodge here this night,  I will bring you word again, as Jehovah shall speak to me. And the rulers of Moab abode with Balaam.
God came to Balaam,  said, What men are these with thee?
Balaam said to God, Balak the son of Zippor, king of Moab, has sent to me, saying,
Behold, the people came out of Egypt, it covers the face of the earth. Now, come curse them for me. Perhaps I shall be able to fight against them,  shall drive them out.
God said to Balaam, Thou shall not go with them. Thou shall not curse the people, for they are blessed.
Balaam rose up in the morning,  said to the rulers of Balak, Get into your land, for Jehovah refuses to give me leave to go with you.
the rulers of Moab rose up,  they went to Balak,  said, Balaam refuses to come with us.
Balak sent yet again rulers, more,  more honorable than they.
they came to Balaam,  said to him, Thus says Balak the son of Zippor, Let nothing, I pray thee, hinder thee from coming to me.
For I will promote thee to very great honor,  whatever thou say to me I will do. Come therefore, I pray thee, curse this people for me.
Balaam answered and said to the servants of Balak, If Balak would give me his house full of silver and gold, I cannot go beyond the word of Jehovah my God, to do less or more.
Now therefore, I pray you, tarry ye also here this night, that I may know what Jehovah will speak to me more.
God came to Balaam at night,  said to him, If the men come to call thee, rise up, go with them,  only the word which I speak to thee, that shall thou do.
Balaam rose up in the morning,  saddled his donkey,  went with the rulers of Moab.
God's anger was kindled because he went,  the agent of Jehovah placed himself in the way for an adversary against him. Now he was riding upon his donkey,  his two servants were with him.
the donkey saw the agent of Jehovah standing in the way, with his sword drawn in his hand,  the donkey turned aside out of the way,  went into the field. And Balaam smote the donkey, to turn her into the way.
Then the agent of Jehovah stood in a narrow path between the vineyards, a wall being on this side,  a wall on that side.
the donkey saw the agent of Jehovah,  she thrust herself to the wall,  crushed Balaam's foot against the wall. And he smote her again.
the agent of Jehovah went further,  stood in a narrow place, where was no way to turn either to the right hand or to the left.
the donkey saw the agent of Jehovah,  she lay down under Balaam. And Balaam's anger was kindled,  he smote the donkey with his staff.
Jehovah opened the mouth of the donkey,  she said to Balaam, What have I done to thee, that thou have smitten me these three times?
Balaam said to the donkey, Because thou have mocked me. I would there were a sword in my hand, for now I would have killed thee.
the donkey said to Balaam, Am not I thy donkey, upon which thou have ridden all thy life long to this day? Was I ever accustomed to do so to thee? And he said, No.
Then Jehovah opened the eyes of Balaam,  he saw the agent of Jehovah standing in the way, with his sword drawn in his hand. And he bowed his head,  fell on his face.
the agent of Jehovah said to him, Why have thou smitten thy donkey these three times? Behold, I have come forth as an adversary, because thy way is perverse before me.
the donkey saw me,  turned aside before me these three times. Unless she had turned aside from me, surely now I would have even slain thee,  saved her alive.
Balaam said to the agent of Jehovah, I have sinned, for I knew not that thou stood in the way against me. Now therefore, if it displease thee, I will get back again.
the agent of Jehovah said to Balaam, Go with the men,  only the word that I shall speak to thee, that thou shall speak. So Balaam went with the rulers of Balak.
when Balak heard that Balaam came, he went out to meet him to the City of Moab, which is on the border of the Arnon, which is in the outmost part of the border.
Balak said to Balaam, Did I not earnestly send to thee to call thee? Why did thou not come to me? Am I not able indeed to promote thee to honor?
Balaam said to Balak, Lo, I have come to thee. Have I now any power at all to speak anything? The word that God puts in my mouth, that shall I speak.
Balaam went with Balak,  they came to Kiriath-huzoth.
Balak sacrificed oxen and sheep,  sent to Balaam,  to the rulers that were with him.
it came to pass in the morning, that Balak took Balaam,  brought him up into the high places of Baal,  he saw from there the outmost part of the people.
Balaam said to Balak, Build me here seven altars,  prepare me here seven bullocks and seven rams.
Balak did as Balaam had spoken. And Balak and Balaam offered on every altar a bullock and a ram.
Balaam said to Balak, Stand by thy burnt offering,  I will go. Perhaps Jehovah will come to meet me,  whatever he shows me I will tell thee. And he went to a bare height.
God met Balaam,  he said to him, I have prepared the seven altars,  I have offered up a bullock and a ram on every altar.
Jehovah put a word in Balaam's mouth,  said, Return to Balak,  thus thou shall speak.
he returned to him. And, lo, he was standing by his burnt offering, he,  all the rulers of Moab.
he took up his oracle,  said, From Aram Balak has brought me, the king of Moab from the mountains of the East. Come, curse Jacob for me,  come, defy Israel.
How shall I curse, whom God has not cursed? And how shall I defy, whom Jehovah has not defied?
For from the top of the rocks I see him,  from the hills I behold him. Lo, it is a people that dwells alone,  shall not be reckoned among the nations.
Who can count the dust of Jacob, or number the fourth part of Israel? Let me die the death of the righteous,  let my last end be like his!
Balak said to Balaam, What have thou done to me? I took thee to curse my enemies, , behold, thou have blessed them altogether.
he answered and said, Must I not take heed to speak that which Jehovah puts in my mouth?
Balak said to him, Come, I pray thee, with me to another place, from where thou may see them. Thou shall see but the outmost part of them,  shall not see them all,  curse them for me from there.
he took him into the field of Zophim, to the top of Pisgah,  built seven altars,  offered up a bullock and a ram on every altar.
he said to Balak, Stand here by thy burnt offering, while I meet Jehovah yonder.
Jehovah met Balaam,  put a word in his mouth,  said, Return to Balak,  thus shall thou speak.
he came to him. And, lo, he was standing by his burnt offering,  the rulers of Moab with him. And Balak said to him, What has Jehovah spoken?
he took up his oracle,  said, Rise up, Balak,  hear. Hearken to me, thou son of Zippor.
God is not a man, that he should lie, neither the son of man, that he should repent. Has he said,  will he not do it? Or has he spoken,  will he not make it good?
Behold, I have received to bless. And he has blessed,  I cannot reverse it.
He has not beheld iniquity in Jacob, neither has he seen perverseness in Israel. Jehovah his God is with him,  the shout of a king is among them.
God brings them forth out of Egypt. He has as it were the strength of the wild-ox.
Surely there is no enchantment with Jacob, neither is there any divination with Israel. Now it shall be said of Jacob and of Israel, What has God wrought!
Behold, the people rise up as a lioness,  as a lion he lifts himself up. He shall not lie down until he eats of the prey,  drinks the blood of the slain.
Balak said to Balaam, Neither curse them at all, nor bless them at all.
But Balaam answered and said to Balak, Did I not tell thee, saying, All that Jehovah speaks, that I must do?
Balak said to Balaam, Come now, I will take thee to another place. Perhaps it will please God that thou may curse them for me from there.
Balak took Balaam to the top of Peor, that looks down upon the desert.
Balaam said to Balak, Build for me here seven altars,  prepare for me here seven bullocks and seven rams.
Balak did as Balaam had said,  offered up a bullock and a ram on every altar.
when Balaam saw that it pleased Jehovah to bless Israel, he did not go, as at the other times, to meet with omens,  he set his face toward the wilderness.
Balaam lifted up his eyes,  he saw Israel dwelling according to their tribes,  the Spirit of God came upon him.
he took up his oracle,  said, Balaam the son of Beor says,  the man whose eye was closed says,
he says who hears the words of God, who sees the vision of the Almighty, falling down,  having his eyes open,
How goodly are thy tents, O Jacob, thy tabernacles, O Israel!
As valleys they are spread forth, as gardens by the river-side, as aloes which Jehovah has planted, as cedar trees beside the waters.
Water shall flow from his buckets,  his seed shall be in many waters,  his king shall be higher than Agag,  his kingdom shall be exalted.
God brings him forth out of Egypt. He has as it were the strength of the wild-ox. He shall eat up the nations his adversaries,  shall break their bones in pieces,  smite them through with his arrows.
He couched, he lay down as a lion,  as a lioness. Who shall rouse him up? He who blesses thee is blessed, And he who curses thee is cursed.
Balak's anger was kindled against Balaam,  he struck his hands together. And Balak said to Balaam, I called thee to curse my enemies, , behold, thou have altogether blessed them these three times.
Therefore now flee thou to thy place. I thought to promote thee to great honor, , lo, Jehovah has kept thee back from honor.
Balaam said to Balak, Did I not also speak to thy messengers that thou sent to me, saying,
If Balak would give me his house full of silver and gold, I cannot go beyond the word of Jehovah, to do either good or bad of my own mind. What Jehovah speaks, that I will speak?
now, behold, I go to my people. Come, I will advise thee what this people shall do to thy people in the latter days.
he took up his oracle,  said, Balaam the son of Beor says,  the man whose eye was closed says,
he says who hears the words of God,  knows the knowledge of the Most High, who sees the vision of the Almighty, falling down,  having his eyes open:
I see him,  not now. I behold him,  not near. There shall come forth a star out of Jacob,  a scepter shall rise out of Israel,  shall smite through the corners of Moab,  break down all the sons of tumult.
Edom shall be a possession, Seir also shall be a possession, who were his enemies, while Israel does valiantly.
out of Jacob shall come he who shall have dominion,  shall destroy the remnant from the city.
he looked on Amalek,  took up his oracle,  said, Amalek was the first of the nations,  his latter end shall come to destruction.
he looked on the Kenite,  took up his oracle,  said, Strong is thy dwelling-place,  thy nest is set in the rock.
Nevertheless Kain shall be wasted, until Asshur shall carry thee away captive.
he took up his oracle,  said, Alas, who shall live when God does this?
But ships shall come from the coast of Kittim,  they shall afflict Asshur,  shall afflict Eber,  he also shall come to destruction.
Balaam rose up,  went and returned to his place,  Balak also went his way.
Israel abode in Shittim. And the people began to play the harlot with the daughters of Moab,
for they called the people to the sacrifices of their gods. And the people ate,  bowed down to their gods.
Israel joined himself to Baal-peor,  the anger of Jehovah was kindled against Israel.
Jehovah said to Moses, Take all the chiefs of the people,  hang them up to Jehovah before the sun, that the fierce anger of Jehovah may turn away from Israel.
Moses said to the judges of Israel, Kill ye every one his men who have joined themselves to Baal-peor.
And, behold, one of the sons of Israel came and brought to his brothers a Midianite woman in the sight of Moses,  in the sight of all the congregation of the sons of Israel, while they were weeping at the door of the tent of meeting.
when Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest, saw it, he rose up from the midst of the congregation,  took a spear in his hand.
he went after the man of Israel into the tent,  thrust both of them through, the man of Israel,  the woman through her body. So the plague was stayed from the sons of Israel.
those who died by the plague were twenty-four thousand.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest, has turned my wrath away from the sons of Israel, in that he was jealous with my jealousy among them, so that I did not consume the sons of Israel in my jealousy.
Therefore say, Behold, I give to him my covenant of peace.
it shall be to him,  to his seed after him, the covenant of an everlasting priesthood, because he was jealous for his God,  made atonement for the sons of Israel.
Now the name of the man of Israel who was slain, who was slain with the Midianite woman, was Zimri, the son of Salu, a ruler of a fathers' house among the Simeonites.
the name of the Midianite woman who was slain was Cozbi, the daughter of Zur. He was head of the people of a fathers' house in Midian.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Vex the Midianites,  smite them,
for they vex you with their wiles, with which they have beguiled you in the matter of Peor,  in the matter of Cozbi, the daughter of the ruler of Midian, their sister, who was slain on the day of the plague in the matter of Peor.
it came to pass after the plague, that Jehovah spoke to Moses and to Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest, saying,
Take the sum of all the congregation of the sons of Israel, from twenty years old and upward, by their fathers' houses, all who are able to go forth to war in Israel.
Moses and Eleazar the priest spoke with them in the plains of Moab by the Jordan at Jericho
saying from twenty years old and upward, as Jehovah commanded Moses and the sons of Israel, who came forth out of the land of Egypt.
Reuben, the firstborn of Israel. The sons of Reuben: of Hanoch, the family of the Hanochites; of Pallu, the family of the Palluites;
of Hezron, the family of the Hezronites; of Carmi, the family of the Carmites.
These are the families of the Reubenites. And those who were numbered of them were forty-three thousand and seven hundred and thirty.
And the sons of Pallu: Eliab.
the sons of Eliab: Nemuel,  Dathan,  Abiram. These are that Dathan and Abiram, who were renown men of the congregation, who strove against Moses and against Aaron in the company of Korah when they strove against Jehovah,
the earth opened its mouth,  swallowed them up together with Korah when that company died, that time the fire devoured two hundred and fifty men,  they became an example.
Notwithstanding, the sons of Korah did not die.)
The sons of Simeon according to their families: of Nemuel, the family of the Nemuelites; of Jamin, the family of the Jaminites; of Jachin, the family of the Jachinites;
of Zerah, the family of the Zerahites; of Shaul, the family of the Shaulites.
These are the families of the Simeonites, twenty-two thousand and two hundred.
The sons of Gad according to their families: of Zephon, the family of the Zephonites; of Haggi, the family of the Haggites; of Shuni, the family of the Shunites;
of Ozni, the family of the Oznites; of Eri, the family of the Erites;
of Arod, the family of the Arodites; of Areli, the family of the Arelites.
These are the families of the sons of Gad according to those who were numbered of them, forty thousand and five hundred.
The sons of Judah: Er and Onan,  Er and Onan died in the land of Canaan.
the sons of Judah according to their families were: of Shelah, the family of the Shelanites; of Perez, the family of the Perezites; of Zerah, the family of the Zerahites.
the sons of Perez were: of Hezron, the family of the Hezronites; of Hamul, the family of the Hamulites.
These are the families of Judah according to those who were numbered of them, seventy-six thousand and five hundred.
The sons of Issachar according to their families: of Tola, the family of the Tolaites; of Puvah, the family of the Punites;
of Jashub, the family of the Jashubites; of Shimron, the family of the Shimronites.
These are the families of Issachar according to those who were numbered of them, sixty-four thousand and three hundred.
The sons of Zebulun according to their families: of Sered, the family of the Seredites; of Elon, the family of the Elonites; of Jahleel, the family of the Jahleelites.
These are the families of the Zebulunites according to those who were numbered of them, sixty thousand and five hundred.
The sons of Joseph according to their families: Manasseh and Ephraim.
The sons of Manasseh: of Machir, the family of the Machirites; and Machir begot Gilead; of Gilead, the family of the Gileadites.
These are the sons of Gilead: of Iezer, the family of the Iezerites; of Helek, the family of the Helekites;
of Asriel, the family of the Asrielites; and of Shechem, the family of the Shechemites;
of Shemida, the family of the Shemidaites; and of Hepher, the family of the Hepherites.
Zelophehad the son of Hepher had no sons,  daughters,  the names of the daughters of Zelophehad were Mahlah,  Noah, Hoglah, Milcah,  Tirzah.
These are the families of Manasseh,  those who were numbered of them were fifty-two thousand and seven hundred.
These are the sons of Ephraim according to their families: of Shuthelah, the family of the Shuthelahites; of Becher, the family of the Becherites; of Tahan, the family of the Tahanites.
these are the sons of Shuthelah: of Eran, the family of the Eranites.
These are the families of the sons of Ephraim according to those who were numbered of them, thirty-two thousand and five hundred. These are the sons of Joseph after their families.
The sons of Benjamin according to their families: of Bela, the family of the Belaites; of Ashbel, the family of the Ashbelites; of Ahiram, the family of the Ahiramites;
of Shephupham, the family of the Shuphamites; of Hupham, the family of the Huphamites.
the sons of Bela were Ard and Naaman: of Ard, the family of the Ardites; of Naaman, the family of the Naamites.
These are the sons of Benjamin according to their families,  those who were numbered of them were forty-five thousand and six hundred.
These are the sons of Dan according to their families: of Shuham, the family of the Shuhamites. These are the families of Dan according to their families.
All the families of the Shuhamites, according to those who were numbered of them, were sixty-four thousand and four hundred.
The sons of Asher according to their families: of Imnah, the family of the Imnites; of Ishvi, the family of the Ishvites; of Beriah, the family of the Berites.
Of the sons of Beriah: of Heber, the family of the Heberites; of Malchiel, the family of the Malchielites.
the name of the daughter of Asher was Serah.
These are the families of the sons of Asher according to those who were numbered of them, fifty-three thousand and four hundred.
The sons of Naphtali according to their families: of Jahzeel, the family of the Jahzeelites; of Guni, the family of the Gunites;
of Jezer, the family of the Jezerites; of Shillem, the family of the Shillemites.
These are the families of Naphtali according to their families,  those who were numbered of them were forty-five thousand and four hundred.
These are those who were numbered of the sons of Israel, six hundred one thousand seven hundred and thirty.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
To these the land shall be divided for an inheritance according to the number of names.
To the many thou shall give more inheritance,  to the few thou shall give less inheritance: to each one according to those who were numbered of him shall his inheritance be given.
Notwithstanding, the land shall be divided by lot. They shall inherit according to the names of the tribes of their fathers.
According to the lot their inheritance shall be divided between the many and the fewer.
these are those who were numbered of the Levites according to their families: of Gershon, the family of the Gershonites; of Kohath, the family of the Kohathites; of Merari, the family of the Merarites.
These are the families of Levi: the family of the Libnites, the family of the Hebronites, the family of the Mahlites, the family of the Mushites, the family of the Korahites. And Kohath begot Amram.
the name of Amram's wife was Jochebed, the daughter of Levi, who was born to Levi in Egypt. And she bore to Amram, Aaron and Moses,  Miriam their sister.
to Aaron were born Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar.
Nadab and Abihu died when they offered strange fire before Jehovah.
those who were numbered of them were twenty-three thousand, every male from a month old and upward, for they were not numbered among the sons of Israel, because there was no inheritance given them among the sons of Israel.
These are those who were numbered by Moses and Eleazar the priest, who numbered the sons of Israel in the plains of Moab by the Jordan at Jericho.
But among these there was not a man of them who was numbered by Moses and Aaron the priest, who numbered the sons of Israel in the wilderness of Sinai.
For Jehovah had said of them, They shall surely die in the wilderness. And there was not a man of them left, except Caleb the son of Jephunneh,  Joshua the son of Nun.
Then the daughters of Zelophehad, the son of Hepher, the son of Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh, of the families of Manasseh the son of Joseph, drew near. And these are the names of his daughters: Mahlah, Noah,  Hoglah,  Milcah,  Tirzah.
they stood before Moses,  before Eleazar the priest,  before the rulers and all the congregation, at the door of the tent of meeting, saying,
Our father died in the wilderness,  he was not among the company of those who gathered themselves together against Jehovah in the company of Korah,  he died in his own sin,  he had no sons.
Why should the name of our father be taken away from among his family, because he had no son? Give to us a possession among the brothers of our father.
Moses brought their case before Jehovah.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
The daughters of Zelophehad speak right. Thou shall surely give them a possession of an inheritance among their father's brothers,  thou shall cause the inheritance of their father to pass to them.
thou shall speak to the sons of Israel, saying, If a man dies,  has no son, then ye shall cause his inheritance to pass to his daughter.
if he has no daughter, then ye shall give his inheritance to his brothers.
if he has no brothers, then ye shall give his inheritance to his father's brothers.
if his father has no brothers, then ye shall give his inheritance to his kinsman who is next to him of his family,  he shall possess it. And it shall be to the sons of Israel a statute and ordinance, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
Jehovah said to Moses, Get thee up onto this mountain of Abarim,  behold the land which I have given to the sons of Israel.
when thou have seen it, thou also shall be gathered to thy people, as Aaron thy brother was gathered,
because ye rebelled against my word in the wilderness of Zin, in the strife of the congregation, to sanctify me at the waters before their eyes. (These are the waters of Meribah of Kadesh in the wilderness of Zin.)
Moses spoke to Jehovah, saying,
Let Jehovah, the God of the spirits of all flesh, appoint a man over the congregation,
who may go out before them,  who may come in before them,  who may lead them out,  who may bring them in, that the congregation of Jehovah be not as sheep which have no shepherd.
Jehovah said to Moses, Take thee Joshua the son of Nun, a man in whom is the Spirit,  lay thy hand upon him,
set him before Eleazar the priest,  before all the congregation,  give him a charge in their sight.
thou shall put of thine honor upon him, that all the congregation of the sons of Israel may obey.
he shall stand before Eleazar the priest, who shall inquire for him by the judgment of the Urim before Jehovah. At his word shall they go out,  at his word they shall come in, both he,  all the sons of Israel with him, even all the congregation.
Moses did as Jehovah commanded him. And he took Joshua,  set him before Eleazar the priest,  before all the congregation.
he laid his hands upon him,  gave him a charge, as Jehovah spoke by Moses.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Command the sons of Israel,  say to them, My oblation, my food for my offerings made by fire, of a sweet savor to me, ye shall observe to offer to me in their due season.
thou shall say to them, This is the offering made by fire which ye shall offer to Jehovah: he-lambs a year old without blemish, two day by day, for a continual burnt offering.
The one lamb thou shall offer in the morning,  the other lamb thou shall offer at evening,
the tenth part of an ephah of fine flour for a meal offering, mingled with the fourth part of a hin of beaten oil.
It is a continual burnt offering, which was ordained on mount Sinai for a sweet savor, an offering made by fire to Jehovah.
the drink offering of it shall be the fourth part of a hin for the one lamb. In the holy place thou shall pour out a drink offering of strong drink to Jehovah.
the other lamb thou shall offer at evening. As the meal offering of the morning,  as the drink offering of it, thou shall offer it, an offering made by fire, of a sweet savor to Jehovah.
on the sabbath day two he-lambs a year old without blemish,  two tenth parts of an ephah of fine flour for a meal offering, mingled with oil,  the drink offering of it.
This is the burnt offering of every sabbath, besides the continual burnt offering,  the drink offering of it.
in the beginnings of your months ye shall offer a burnt offering to Jehovah: two young bullocks,  one ram, seven he-lambs a year old without blemish,
three tenth parts of an ephah of fine flour for a meal offering, mingled with oil for each bullock,  two tenth parts of fine flour for a meal offering, mingled with oil for the one ram,
a tenth part of fine flour mingled with oil for a meal offering to every lamb, for a burnt offering of a sweet savor, an offering made by fire to Jehovah.
their drink offerings shall be half a hin of wine for a bullock,  the third part of a hin for the ram,  the fourth part of a hin for a lamb. This is the burnt offering of every month throughout the months of the year.
one he-goat for a sin offering to Jehovah, it shall be offered besides the continual burnt offering,  the drink offering of it.
in the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month, is Jehovah's Passover.
on the fifteenth day of this month shall be a feast; seven days shall unleavened bread be eaten.
In the first day shall be a holy convocation. Ye shall do no job work.
But ye shall offer an offering made by fire, a burnt offering to Jehovah: two young bullocks,  one ram,  seven he-lambs a year old (they shall be to you without blemish),
their meal offering, fine flour mingled with oil. Three tenth parts ye shall offer for a bullock,  two tenth parts for the ram,
a tenth part shall thou offer for every lamb of the seven lambs.
Also one he-goat for a sin offering, to make atonement for you.
Ye shall offer these besides the burnt offering of the morning, which is for a continual burnt offering.
After this manner ye shall offer daily, for seven days, the food of the offering made by fire, of a sweet savor to Jehovah. It shall be offered besides the continual burnt offering,  the drink offering of it.
on the seventh day ye shall have a holy convocation. Ye shall do no job work.
Also in the day of the first-fruits, when ye offer a new meal offering to Jehovah in your feast of weeks, ye shall have a holy convocation. Ye shall do no job work.
But ye shall offer a burnt offering for a sweet savor to Jehovah: two young bullocks, one ram, seven he-lambs a year old,
their meal offering, fine flour mingled with oil, three tenth parts for each bullock, two tenth parts for the one ram,
a tenth part for every lamb of the seven lambs,
one he-goat, to make atonement for you.
Besides the continual burnt offering,  the meal offering of it, ye shall offer them (they shall be to you without blemish),  their drink offerings.
in the seventh month, on the first day of the month, ye shall have a holy convocation. Ye shall do no job work. It is a day of blowing of trumpets to you.
ye shall offer a burnt offering for a sweet savor to Jehovah: one young bullock, one ram, seven he-lambs a year old without blemish,
their meal offering, fine flour mingled with oil, three tenth parts for the bullock, two tenth parts for the ram,
one tenth part for every lamb of the seven lambs,
one he-goat for a sin offering, to make atonement for you,
besides the burnt offering of the new moon,  the meal offering of it,  the continual burnt offering and the meal offering of it,  their drink offerings, according to their ordinance, for a sweet savor, an offering made by fire to Jehovah.
on the tenth day of this seventh month ye shall have a holy convocation,  ye shall afflict your souls. Ye shall do no manner of work.
But ye shall offer a burnt offering to Jehovah for a sweet savor: one young bullock, one ram, seven he-lambs a year old (they shall be to you without blemish),
their meal offering, fine flour mingled with oil, three tenth parts for the bullock, two tenth parts for the one ram,
a tenth part for every lamb of the seven lambs,
one he-goat for a sin offering, besides the sin offering of atonement,  the continual burnt offering,  the meal offering of it,  their drink offerings.
on the fifteenth day of the seventh month ye shall have a holy convocation. Ye shall do no job work,  ye shall keep a feast to Jehovah seven days.
ye shall offer a burnt offering, an offering made by fire, of a sweet savor to Jehovah: thirteen young bullocks, two rams, fourteen he-lambs a year old (they shall be without blemish),
their meal offering, fine flour mingled with oil, three tenth parts for every bullock of the thirteen bullocks, two tenth parts for each ram of the two rams,
a tenth part for every lamb of the fourteen lambs,
one he-goat for a sin offering, besides the continual burnt offering, the meal offering of it,  the drink offering of it.
on the second day, twelve young bullocks, two rams, fourteen he-lambs a year old without blemish,
their meal offering and their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams,  for the lambs, according to their number, after the ordinance,
one he-goat for a sin offering, besides the continual burnt offering,  the meal offering of it,  their drink offerings.
on the third day, eleven bullocks, two rams, fourteen he-lambs a year old without blemish,
their meal offering and their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams,  for the lambs, according to their number, after the ordinance,
one he-goat for a sin offering, besides the continual burnt offering,  the meal offering of it,  the drink offering of it.
on the fourth day, ten bullocks, two rams, fourteen he-lambs a year old without blemish,
their meal offering and their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams,  for the lambs, according to their number, after the ordinance,
one he-goat for a sin offering, besides the continual burnt offering, the meal offering of it,  the drink offering of it.
on the fifth day, nine bullocks, two rams, fourteen he-lambs a year old without blemish,
their meal offering and their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams,  for the lambs, according to their number, after the ordinance,
one he-goat for a sin offering, besides the continual burnt offering,  the meal offering of it,  the drink offering of it.
on the sixth day, eight bullocks, two rams, fourteen he-lambs a year old without blemish,
their meal offering and their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams,  for the lambs, according to their number, after the ordinance,
one he-goat for a sin offering, besides the continual burnt offering, the meal offering of it,  the drink offerings of it.
on the seventh day, seven bullocks, two rams, fourteen he-lambs a year old without blemish,
their meal offering and their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams,  for the lambs, according to their number, after the ordinance,
one he-goat for a sin offering, besides the continual burnt offering, the meal offering of it,  the drink offering of it.
On the eighth day, ye shall have a solemn assembly. Ye shall do no job work.
But ye shall offer a burnt offering, an offering made by fire, of a sweet savor to Jehovah: one bullock, one ram, seven he-lambs a year old without blemish,
their meal offering and their drink offerings for the bullock, for the ram,  for the lambs, shall be according to their number, after the ordinance,
one he-goat for a sin offering, besides the continual burnt offering,  the meal offering of it,  the drink offering of it.
These ye shall offer to Jehovah in your set feasts, besides your vows,  your freewill offerings, for your burnt offerings,  for your meal offerings,  for your drink offerings,  for your peace offerings.
Moses told the sons of Israel according to all that Jehovah commanded Moses.
Moses spoke to the heads of the tribes of the sons of Israel, saying, This is the thing which Jehovah has commanded.
When a man vows a vow to Jehovah, or swears an oath to bind his soul with a bond, he shall not break his word. He shall do according to all that proceeds out of his mouth.
Also when a woman vows a vow to Jehovah,  binds herself by a bond, being in her father's house, in her youth,
her father hears her vow,  her bond with which she has bound her soul,  her father remains silent at her, then all her vows shall stand,  every bond with which she has bound her soul shall stand.
But if her father disallows her in the day that he hears, none of her vows, or of her bonds with which she has bound her soul, shall stand. And Jehovah will forgive her, because her father disallowed her.
if she is married to a husband, while her vows are upon her, or the rash utterance of her lips, with which she has bound her soul,
her husband hears it,  remains silent at her in the day that he hears it, then her vows shall stand,  her bonds with which she has bound her soul shall stand.
But if her husband disallows her in the day that he hears it, then he shall make void her vow which is upon her,  the rash utterance of her lips, with which she has bound her soul. And Jehovah will forgive her.
But the vow of a widow, or of her who is divorced, even everything with which she has bound her soul shall stand against her.
if she vowed in her husband's house, or bound her soul by a bond with an oath,
her husband heard it,  remained silent at her,  did not disallow her, then all her vows shall stand,  every bond with which she bound her soul shall stand.
But if her husband made them null and void in the day that he heard them, then whatever proceeded out of her lips concerning her vows, or concerning the bond of her soul, shall not stand. Her husband has made them void,  Jehovah will forgive her.
Every vow,  every binding oath to afflict the soul, her husband may establish it, or her husband may make it void.
But if her husband altogether remains silent at her from day to day, then he establishes all her vows, or all her bonds, which are upon her. He has established them, because he remained silent at her in the day that he heard them.
But if he shall make them null and void after he has heard them, then he shall bear her iniquity.
These are the statutes, which Jehovah commanded Moses, between a man and his wife, between a father and his daughter, being in her youth in her father's house.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Avenge the sons of Israel of the Midianites. Afterward thou shall be gathered to thy people.
Moses spoke to the people, saying, Arm ye men from among you for the war, that they may go against Midian, to execute Jehovah's vengeance on Midian.
From every tribe a thousand, throughout all the tribes of Israel, ye shall send to the war.
So there were delivered, out of the thousands of Israel, a thousand of every tribe, twelve thousand armed for war.
Moses sent them, a thousand of every tribe, to the war, them and Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest, to the war, with the vessels of the sanctuary and the trumpets for the alarm in his hand.
they warred against Midian as Jehovah commanded Moses,  they killed every male.
they killed the kings of Midian with the rest of their slain: Evi,  Rekem,  Zur,  Hur,  Reba, the five kings of Midian. They also killed Balaam the son of Beor with the sword.
the sons of Israel took captive the women of Midian and their little ones. And all their cattle,  all their flocks,  all their goods, they took for a prey.
all their cities in the places in which they dwelt,  all their encampments, they burnt with fire.
they took all the spoil,  all the prey, both of man and of beast.
they brought the captives,  the prey,  the spoil, to Moses,  to Eleazar the priest,  to the congregation of the sons of Israel, to the camp at the plains of Moab, which are by the Jordan at Jericho.
Moses,  Eleazar the priest,  all the rulers of the congregation, went forth to meet them outside the camp.
Moses was angry with the officers of the army, the captains of thousands and the captains of hundreds, who came from the service of the war.
Moses said to them, Have ye saved all the women alive?
Behold, these caused the sons of Israel, through the counsel of Balaam, to commit trespass against Jehovah in the matter of Peor,  so the plague was among the congregation of Jehovah.
Now therefore kill every male among the little ones,  kill every woman that has known man by lying with him.
But all the women-children, who have not known man by lying with him, keep alive for yourselves.
encamp ye outside the camp seven days. Whoever has killed any person,  whoever has touched any slain, purify yourselves on the third day and on the seventh day, ye and your captives.
as to every garment,  all that is made of skin,  all work of goats' hair,  all things made of wood, ye shall purify yourselves.
Eleazar the priest said to the men of war who went to the battle, This is the statute of the law which Jehovah has commanded Moses:
only the gold,  the silver, the brass, the iron, the tin,  the lead-
everything which may go into fire-ye shall make to go through the fire,  it shall be clean. Nevertheless it shall be purified with the water for impurity. And all that may not go into fire ye shall make to go through the water.
ye shall wash your clothes on the seventh day,  ye shall be clean,  afterward ye shall come into the camp.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Take the sum of the prey that was taken, both of man and of beast, thou,  Eleazar the priest,  the heads of the fathers of the congregation,
divide the prey into two parts: between the men skilled in war who went out to battle,  all the congregation.
levy a tribute to Jehovah of the men of war who went out to battle: one soul of five hundred, both of the persons,  of the oxen,  of the donkeys,  of the flocks.
Take it of their half,  give it to Eleazar the priest, for Jehovah's heave offering.
of the sons of Israel's half, thou shall take one drawn out of every fifty, of the persons, of the oxen, of the donkeys,  of the flocks, even of all the cattle,  give them to the Levites, who keep the charge of the tabernacle of Jehovah.
Moses and Eleazar the priest did as Jehovah commanded Moses.
Now the prey, over and above the booty which the men of war took, was six hundred seventy-five thousand sheep,
seventy-two thousand oxen,
sixty-one thousand donkeys,
thirty-two thousand persons in all, of the women who had not known man by lying with him.
the half, which was the portion of those who went out to war, was in number three hundred thirty-seven thousand and five hundred sheep.
Jehovah's tribute of the sheep was six hundred and seventy-five.
the oxen were thirty-six thousand, of which Jehovah's tribute was seventy-two.
the donkeys were thirty thousand and five hundred, of which Jehovah's tribute was sixty-one.
the persons were sixteen thousand, of whom Jehovah's tribute was thirty-two persons.
Moses gave the tribute, which was Jehovah's heave offering, to Eleazar the priest, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
of the sons of Israel's half, which Moses divided off from the men who warred
now the congregation's half was three hundred thirty-seven thousand and five hundred sheep,
thirty-six thousand oxen,
thirty thousand and five hundred donkeys,
sixteen thousand persons),
even of the sons of Israel's half, Moses took one drawn out of every fifty, both of man and of beast,  gave them to the Levites, who kept the charge of the tabernacle of Jehovah, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
the officers who were over the thousands of the army, the captains of thousands,  the captains of hundreds, came near to Moses.
they said to Moses, Thy servants have taken the sum of the men of war that are under our charge,  there lacks not one man of us.
we have brought Jehovah's oblation, what every man has gotten, of jewels of gold, ankle-chains,  bracelets, signet-rings, earrings,  armlets, to make atonement for our souls before Jehovah.
Moses and Eleazar the priest took the gold from them, even all wrought jewels.
all the gold of the heave offering that they offered up to Jehovah, of the captains of thousands,  of the captains of hundreds, was sixteen thousand seven hundred and fifty shekels.
For the men of war had taken booty, every man for himself.)
Moses and Eleazar the priest took the gold of the captains of thousands and of hundreds,  brought it into the tent of meeting, for a memorial for the sons of Israel before Jehovah.
Now the sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad had a very great multitude of cattle. And when they saw the land of Jazer,  the land of Gilead, that, behold, the place was a place for cattle,
the sons of Gad and the sons of Reuben came and spoke to Moses,  to Eleazar the priest,  to the rulers of the congregation, saying,
Ataroth,  Dibon,  Jazer,  Nimrah,  Heshbon,  Elealeh,  Sebam,  Nebo,  Beon,
the land which Jehovah smote before the congregation of Israel, is a land for cattle,  thy servants have cattle.
they said, If we have found favor in thy sight, let this land be given to thy servants for a possession. Bring us not over the Jordan.
Moses said to the sons of Gad,  to the sons of Reuben, Shall your brothers go to the war,  shall ye sit here?
why do ye discourage the heart of the sons of Israel from going over into the land which Jehovah has given them?
Thus did your fathers when I sent them from Kadesh-barnea to see the land.
For when they went up to the valley of Eshcol,  saw the land, they discouraged the heart of the sons of Israel, that they should not go into the land which Jehovah had given them.
Jehovah's anger was kindled in that day,  he swore, saying,
Surely none of the men who came up out of Egypt, from twenty years old and upward, shall see the land which I swore to Abraham, to Isaac,  to Jacob; because they have not wholly followed me,
except Caleb the son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite,  Joshua the son of Nun, because they have wholly followed Jehovah.
Jehovah's anger was kindled against Israel,  he made them wander to and fro in the wilderness forty years, until all the generation that had done evil in the sight of Jehovah was consumed.
And, behold, ye are risen up in your fathers' stead, an increase of sinful men, to augment yet the fierce anger of Jehovah toward Israel.
For if ye turn away from after him, he will yet again leave them in the wilderness,  ye will destroy all this people.
they came near to him,  said, We will build sheepfolds here for our cattle,  cities for our little ones,
but we ourselves will be ready armed to go before the sons of Israel, until we have brought them to their place. And our little ones shall dwell in the fortified cities because of the inhabitants of the land.
We will not return to our houses until the sons of Israel have inherited every man his inheritance.
For we will not inherit with them on the other side of the Jordan,  forward, because our inheritance is fallen to us on this side of the Jordan eastward.
Moses said to them, If ye will do this thing, if ye will arm yourselves to go before Jehovah to the war,
every armed man of you will pass over the Jordan before Jehovah, until he has driven out his enemies from before him,
the land is subdued before Jehovah, then afterward ye shall return,  be guiltless towards Jehovah,  towards Israel,  this land shall be to you for a possession before Jehovah.
But if ye will not do so, behold, ye have sinned against Jehovah,  be sure your sin will find you out.
Build for you cities for your little ones,  folds for your sheep,  do that which has proceeded out of your mouth.
the sons of Gad and the sons of Reuben spoke to Moses, saying, Thy servants will do as my lord commands.
Our little ones, our wives, our flocks,  all our cattle, shall be there in the cities of Gilead,
but thy servants will pass over, every man who is armed for war, before Jehovah to battle, as my lord says.
So Moses gave charge concerning them to Eleazar the priest,  to Joshua the son of Nun,  to the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the sons of Israel.
Moses said to them, If the sons of Gad and the sons of Reuben will pass with you over the Jordan, every man that is armed to battle, before Jehovah,  the land shall be subdued before you, then ye shall give them the land of Gilead for a possession,
but if they will not pass over with you armed, they shall have possessions among you in the land of Canaan.
the sons of Gad and the sons of Reuben answered, saying, As Jehovah has said to thy servants, so we will do.
We will pass over armed before Jehovah into the land of Canaan,  the possession of our inheritance is with us beyond the Jordan.
Moses gave to them, even to the sons of Gad,  to the sons of Reuben,  to the half-tribe of Manasseh the son of Joseph, the kingdom of Sihon king of the Amorites,  the kingdom of Og king of Bashan, the land, according to the cities of it with their borders, even the cities of the land round about.
the sons of Gad built Dibon,  Ataroth,  Aroer,
Atrothshophan,  Jazer,  Jogbehah,
Beth-nimrah,  Beth-haran: fortified cities,  folds for sheep.
the sons of Reuben built Heshbon,  Elealeh,  Kiriathaim,
Nebo,  Baal-meon, (their names being changed,) and Sibmah. And they gave other names to the cities which they built.
the sons of Machir the son of Manasseh went to Gilead,  took it,  dispossessed the Amorites that were in it.
Moses gave Gilead to Machir the son of Manasseh,  he dwelt in it.
Jair the son of Manasseh went and took the towns of it,  called them Havvoth-jair.
Nobah went and took Kenath,  the villages of it,  called it Nobah, after his own name.
These are the journeys of the sons of Israel when they went forth out of the land of Egypt by their armies under the hand of Moses and Aaron.
Moses wrote their goings out according to their journeys by the commandment of Jehovah. And these are their journeys according to their goings out.
they journeyed from Rameses in the first month, on the fifteenth day of the first month. On the morrow after the Passover the sons of Israel went out with a high hand in the sight of all the Egyptians,
while the Egyptians were burying all their firstborn whom Jehovah had smitten among them; upon their gods also Jehovah executed judgments.
the sons of Israel journeyed from Rameses,  encamped in Succoth.
they journeyed from Succoth,  encamped in Etham, which is in the edge of the wilderness.
they journeyed from Etham,  turned back to Pihahiroth, which is before Baal-zephon,  they encamped before Migdol.
they journeyed from before Hahiroth,  passed through the midst of the sea into the wilderness. And they went three days' journey in the wilderness of Etham,  encamped in Marah.
they journeyed from Marah,  came to Elim. And in Elim were twelve springs of water,  seventy palm trees,  they encamped there.
they journeyed from Elim,  encamped by the Red Sea.
they journeyed from the Red Sea,  encamped in the wilderness of Sin.
they journeyed from the wilderness of Sin,  encamped in Dophkah.
they journeyed from Dophkah,  encamped in Alush.
they journeyed from Alush,  encamped in Rephidim, where was no water for the people to drink.
they journeyed from Rephidim,  encamped in the wilderness of Sinai.
they journeyed from the wilderness of Sinai,  encamped in Kibroth-hattaavah.
they journeyed from Kibroth-hattaavah,  encamped in Hazeroth.
they journeyed from Hazeroth,  encamped in Rithmah.
they journeyed from Rithmah,  encamped in Rimmon-perez.
they journeyed from Rimmon-perez,  encamped in Libnah.
they journeyed from Libnah,  encamped in Rissah.
they journeyed from Rissah,  encamped in Kehelathah.
they journeyed from Kehelathah,  encamped in mount Shepher.
they journeyed from mount Shepher,  encamped in Haradah.
they journeyed from Haradah,  encamped in Makheloth.
they journeyed from Makheloth,  encamped in Tahath.
they journeyed from Tahath,  encamped in Terah.
they journeyed from Terah,  encamped in Mithkah.
they journeyed from Mithkah,  encamped in Hashmonah.
they journeyed from Hashmonah,  encamped in Moseroth.
they journeyed from Moseroth,  encamped in Bene-jaakan.
they journeyed from Bene-jaakan,  encamped in Hor-haggidgad.
they journeyed from Hor-haggidgad,  encamped in Jotbathah.
they journeyed from Jotbathah,  encamped in Abronah.
they journeyed from Abronah,  encamped in Ezion-geber.
they journeyed from Ezion-geber,  encamped in the wilderness of Zin (the same is Kadesh).
they journeyed from Kadesh,  encamped at mount Hor, in the edge of the land of Edom.
And Aaron the priest went up onto mount Hor at the commandment of Jehovah,  died there, in the fortieth year after the sons of Israel came out of the land of Egypt, in the fifth month, on the first day of the month.
Aaron was a hundred and twenty-three years old when he died in mount Hor.
the Canaanite, the king of Arad, who dwelt in the South in the land of Canaan, heard of the coming of the sons of Israel.)
they journeyed from mount Hor,  encamped in Zalmonah.
they journeyed from Zalmonah,  encamped in Punon.
they journeyed from Punon,  encamped in Oboth.
they journeyed from Oboth,  encamped in Iye-abarim, in the border of Moab.
they journeyed from Iyim,  encamped in Dibon-gad.
they journeyed from Dibon-gad,  encamped in Almon-diblathaim.
they journeyed from Almon-diblathaim,  encamped in the mountains of Abarim, before Nebo.
they journeyed from the mountains of Abarim,  encamped in the plains of Moab by the Jordan at Jericho.
they encamped by the Jordan, from Beth-jeshimoth even to Abel-shittim in the plains of Moab.
Jehovah spoke to Moses in the plains of Moab by the Jordan at Jericho, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel,  say to them, When ye pass over the Jordan into the land of Canaan,
then ye shall drive out all the inhabitants of the land from before you,  destroy all their figured stones,  destroy all their molten images,  demolish all their high places.
ye shall take possession of the land,  dwell in it, for to you I have given the land to possess it.
ye shall inherit the land by lot according to your families. To the more ye shall give more inheritance,  to the few thou shall give less inheritance. Wherever the lot falls to any man, that shall be his. Ye shall inherit according to the tribes of your fathers.
But if ye will not drive out the inhabitants of the land from before you, then those that ye let remain of them shall be as pricks in your eyes,  as thorns in your sides,  they shall vex you in the land in which ye dwell.
it shall come to pass, that, as I thought to do to them, so I will do to you.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Command the sons of Israel,  say to them, When ye come into the land of Canaan (this is the land that shall fall to you for an inheritance, even the land of Canaan according to the borders of it),
then your south quarter shall be from the wilderness of Zin along by the side of Edom. And your south border shall be from the end of the Salt Sea eastward.
your border shall turn about southward of the ascent of Akrabbim,  pass along to Zin. And the goings out of it shall be southward of Kadesh-barnea. And it shall go forth to Hazar-addar,  pass along to Azmon.
the border shall turn about from Azmon to the brook of Egypt,  the goings out of it shall be at the sea.
for the western border, ye shall have the great sea and the border of it. This shall be your west border.
this shall be your north border: From the great sea ye shall mark out for you mount Hor.
From mount Hor ye shall mark out to the entrance of Hamath. And the goings out of the border shall be at Zedad.
the border shall go forth to Ziphron,  the goings out of it shall be at Hazar-enan. This shall be your north border.
ye shall mark out your east border from Hazar-enan to Shepham.
the border shall go down from Shepham to Riblah, on the east side of Ain. And the border shall go down,  shall reach to the side of the sea of Chinnereth eastward.
the border shall go down to the Jordan,  the goings out of it shall be at the Salt Sea. This shall be your land according to the borders of it round about.
Moses commanded the sons of Israel, saying, This is the land which ye shall inherit by lot, which Jehovah has commanded to give to the nine tribes,  to the half-tribe.
For the tribe of the sons of Reuben according to their fathers' houses,  the tribe of the children of Gad according to their fathers' houses, have received,  the half-tribe of Manasseh have received, their inheritance.
The two tribes and the half-tribe have received their inheritance beyond the Jordan at Jericho eastward, toward the sunrise.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
These are the names of the men who shall divide the land to you for inheritance: Eleazar the priest,  Joshua the son of Nun.
ye shall take one ruler of every tribe, to divide the land for inheritance.
these are the names of the men: Of the tribe of Judah, Caleb the son of Jephunneh.
of the tribe of the sons of Simeon, Shemuel the son of Ammihud.
Of the tribe of Benjamin, Elidad the son of Chislon.
of the tribe of the sons of Dan a ruler, Bukki the son of Jogli.
Of the sons of Joseph: of the tribe of the sons of Manasseh a ruler, Hanniel the son of Ephod,
of the tribe of the sons of Ephraim a ruler, Kemuel the son of Shiphtan.
of the tribe of the sons of Zebulun a ruler, Elizaphan the son of Parnach.
of the tribe of the sons of Issachar a ruler, Paltiel the son of Azzan.
of the tribe of the sons of Asher a ruler, Ahihud the son of Shelomi.
of the tribe of the sons of Naphtali a ruler, Pedahel the son of Ammihud.
These are those whom Jehovah commanded to divide the inheritance to the sons of Israel in the land of Canaan.
Jehovah spoke to Moses in the plains of Moab by the Jordan at Jericho, saying,
Command the sons of Israel, that they give to the Levites from the inheritance of their possession cities to dwell in. And ye shall give suburbs for the cities round about them to the Levites.
they shall have the cities to dwell in,  their suburbs shall be for their cattle,  for their substance,  for all their beasts.
the suburbs of the cities, which ye shall give to the Levites, shall be from the wall of the city and outward a thousand cubits round about.
ye shall measure outside the city for the east side two thousand cubits,  for the south side two thousand cubits,  for the west side two thousand cubits,  for the north side two thousand cubits, the city being in the midst. This shall be to them the suburbs of the cities.
of the cities which ye shall give to the Levites, there shall be the six cities of refuge, which ye shall give for the manslayer to flee to. And besides them ye shall give forty-two cities.
All the cities which ye shall give to the Levites shall be forty-eight cities, them with their suburbs.
concerning the cities which ye shall give of the possession of the sons of Israel, from the many ye shall take many,  from the few ye shall take few. Everyone according to his inheritance which he inherits shall give of his cities to the Levites.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel,  say to them, When ye pass over the Jordan into the land of Canaan,
then ye shall appoint cities to be cities of refuge for you, that the manslayer who kills any person unwittingly may flee there.
the cities shall be to you for refuge from the avenger, that the manslayer not die until he stands before the congregation for judgment.
the cities which ye shall give shall be for you six cities of refuge.
Ye shall give three cities beyond the Jordan,  three cities ye shall give in the land of Canaan. They shall be cities of refuge.
For the sons of Israel,  for the stranger and for the sojourner among them, these six cities shall be for refuge, that everyone who kills any person unwittingly may flee there.
But if he smote him with an instrument of iron, so that he died, he is a murderer. The murderer shall surely be put to death.
if he smote him with a stone in the hand, by which a man may die,  he died, he is a murderer. The murderer shall surely be put to death.
Or if he smote him with a weapon of wood in the hand, by which a man may die,  he died, he is a murderer. The murderer shall surely be put to death.
The avenger of blood shall himself put the murderer to death. When he meets him, he shall put him to death.
if he thrust him from hatred, or hurled at him, lying in wait, so that he died,
or in enmity smote him with his hand, so that he died, he who smote him shall surely be put to death. He is a murderer. The avenger of blood shall put the murderer to death, when he meets him.
But if he thrust him suddenly without enmity, or hurled upon him anything without lying in wait,
or with any stone, by which a man may die, not seeing him,  cast it upon him, so that he died,  he was not his enemy, nor sought his harm,
then the congregation shall judge between the smiter and the avenger of blood according to these ordinances.
the congregation shall deliver the manslayer out of the hand of the avenger of blood,  the congregation shall restore him to his city of refuge where he fled. And he shall dwell in it until the death of the high priest, who was anointed with the holy oil.
But if the manslayer shall at any time go beyond the border of his city of refuge where he flees,
the avenger of blood find him outside the border of his city of refuge,  the avenger of blood kills the manslayer, he shall not be guilty of blood,
because he should have remained in his city of refuge until the death of the high priest. But after the death of the high priest the manslayer shall return into the land of his possession.
these things shall be for a statute and ordinance to you throughout your generations in all your dwellings.
Whoever kills any person, the murderer shall be slain at the mouth of witnesses,  one witness shall not testify against any person so that he dies.
Moreover ye shall take no ransom for the life of a murderer who is guilty of death,  he shall surely be put to death.
ye shall take no ransom for him who has fled to his city of refuge, that he may come again to dwell in the land, until the death of the priest.
So ye shall not pollute the land in which ye are, for blood, it pollutes the land. And no expiation can be made for the land for the blood that is shed in it,  by the blood of him who shed it.
thou shall not defile the land which ye inhabit, in the midst of which I dwell, for I, Jehovah, dwell in the midst of the sons of Israel.
the heads of the fathers of the family of the sons of Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh, of the families of the sons of Joseph, came near,  spoke before Moses,  before the rulers, the heads of the fathers of the sons of Israel.
they said, Jehovah commanded my lord to give the land for inheritance by lot to the sons of Israel. And my lord was commanded by Jehovah to give the inheritance of Zelophehad our brother to his daughters.
if they be married to any of the sons of the other tribes of the sons of Israel, then their inheritance will be taken away from the inheritance of our fathers,  will be added to the inheritance of the tribe to which they shall belong. So it will be taken away from the lot of our inheritance.
when the jubilee of the sons of Israel shall be, then their inheritance will be added to the inheritance of the tribe to which they shall belong. So their inheritance will be taken away from the inheritance of the tribe of our fathers.
Moses commanded the sons of Israel according to the word of Jehovah, saying, The tribe of the sons of Joseph speak right.
This is the thing which Jehovah commands concerning the daughters of Zelophehad, saying, Let them be married to whom they think best, only into the family of the tribe of their father shall they be married.
So no inheritance of the sons of Israel shall remove from tribe to tribe, for the sons of Israel shall cling each one to the inheritance of the tribe of his fathers.
every daughter, who possesses an inheritance in any tribe of the sons of Israel, shall be wife to one of the family of the tribe of her father, that the sons of Israel may possess every man the inheritance of his fathers.
So no inheritance shall move from one tribe to another tribe, for the tribes of the sons of Israel shall cling each one to his own inheritance.
Even as Jehovah commanded Moses, so did the daughters of Zelophehad,
for Mahlah, Tirzah,  Hoglah,  Milcah,  Noah, the daughters of Zelophedad, were married to their father's brothers' sons.
They were married into the families of the sons of Manasseh the son of Joseph,  their inheritance remained in the tribe of the family of their father.
These are the commandments and the ordinances which Jehovah commanded by Moses to the sons of Israel in the plains of Moab by the Jordan at Jericho.
Deuteronomy
Deut. These are the words which Moses spoke to all Israel beyond the Jordan in the wilderness, in the Arabah opposite Suph, between Paran,  Tophel,  Laban,  Hazeroth,  Di-zahab.
Deut. It is eleven days journey from Horeb by the way of mount Seir to Kadesh-barnea.
Deut. And it came to pass in the fortieth year, in the eleventh month, on the first day of the month, that Moses spoke to the sons of Israel, according to all that Jehovah had given him in commandment to them,
Deut. after he had smitten Sihon the king of the Amorites, who dwelt in Heshbon,  Og the king of Bashan, who dwelt in Ashtaroth, at Edrei.
Deut. Beyond the Jordan, in the land of Moab, Moses began to declare this law, saying,
Deut. Jehovah our God spoke to us in Horeb, saying, Ye have dwelt long enough at this mountain.
Deut. Turn,  take your journey,  go to the hill-country of the Amorites,  to all the places near thereto, in the Arabah, in the hill-country,  in the lowland,  in the South,  by the sea-shore, the land of the Canaanites,  Lebanon, as far as the great river, the river Euphrates.
Deut. Behold, I have set the land before you. Go in and possess the land which Jehovah swore to your fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac,  to Jacob, to give to them and to their seed after them.
Deut. And I spoke to you at that time, saying, I am not able to bear you myself alone.
Deut. Jehovah your God has multiplied you, , behold, ye are this day as the stars of heaven for multitude.
Deut. Jehovah, the God of your fathers, make you a thousand times as many as ye are,  bless you, as he has promised you!
Deut. How can I myself alone bear your encumbrance,  your burden,  your strife?
Deut. Take for you wise men,  understanding,  known, according to your tribes,  I will make them heads over you.
Deut. And ye answered me,  said, The thing which thou have spoken is good to do.
Deut. So I took the heads of your tribes, wise men,  known,  made them heads over you, captains of thousands,  captains of hundreds,  captains of fifties,  captains of tens,  officers, according to your tribes.
Deut. And I charged your judges at that time, saying, Hear between your brothers,  judge righteously between a man and his brother,  the sojourner who is with him.
Deut. Ye shall not respect persons in judgment. Ye shall hear the small and the great alike. Ye shall not be afraid of the face of man, for the judgment is God's. And the case that is too hard for you ye shall bring to me,  I will hear it.
Deut. And I commanded you at that time all the things which ye should do.
Deut. And we journeyed from Horeb,  went through all that great and terrible wilderness which ye saw, by the way to the hill-country of the Amorites, as Jehovah our God commanded us,  we came to Kadesh-barnea.
Deut. And I said to you, Ye have come to the hill-country of the Amorites, which Jehovah our God gives to us.
Deut. Behold, Jehovah thy God has set the land before thee. Go up, take possession, as Jehovah, the God of thy fathers, has spoken to thee. Fear not, neither be dismayed.
Deut. And ye came near to me, all of you,  said, Let us send men before us, that they may search the land for us,  bring us word again of the way by which we must go up,  the cities to which we shall come.
Deut. And the thing pleased me well. And I took twelve men of you, one man for every tribe.
Deut. And they turned and went up into the hill-country,  came to the valley of Eshcol,  spied it out.
Deut. And they took of the fruit of the land in their hands,  brought it down to us,  brought us word again,  said, It is a good land which Jehovah our God gives to us.
Deut. Yet ye would not go up,  rebelled against the commandment of Jehovah your God.
Deut. And ye murmured in your tents,  said, Because Jehovah hated us, he has brought us forth out of the land of Egypt, to deliver us into the hand of the Amorites, to destroy us.
Deut. Where are we going up? Our brothers have made our heart to melt, saying, The people are greater and taller than we. The cities are great and fortified up to heaven,  moreover we have seen the sons of the Anakim there.
Deut. Then I said to you, Dread not, neither be afraid of them.
Deut. Jehovah your God who goes before you, he will fight for you, according to all that he did for you in Egypt before your eyes,
Deut. and in the wilderness, where thou have seen how that Jehovah thy God bore thee, as a man bears his son, in all the way that ye went, until ye came to this place.
Deut. Yet in this thing ye did not believe Jehovah your God,
Deut. who went before you in the way, to seek out a place for you to pitch your tents in, in fire by night, to show you by what way ye should go,  in the cloud by day.
Deut. And Jehovah heard the voice of your words,  was angry,  swore, saying,
Deut. Surely there shall not one of these men of this evil generation see the good land, which I swore to give to your fathers,
Deut. except Caleb the son of Jephunneh. He shall see it,  I will give to him the land that he has trodden upon,  to his sons, because he has wholly followed Jehovah.
Deut. Also Jehovah was angry with me for your sakes, saying, Thou also shall not go in there.
Deut. Joshua the son of Nun, who stands before thee, he shall go in there. Encourage thou him, for he shall cause Israel to inherit it.
Deut. Moreover your little ones, who ye said would be a prey,  your sons, who this day have no knowledge of good or evil, they shall go in there,  I will give it to them,  they shall possess it.
Deut. But as for you, turn,  take your journey into the wilderness by the way to the Red Sea.
Deut. Then ye answered and said to me, We have sinned against Jehovah, we will go up and fight according to all that Jehovah our God commanded us. And ye girded on every man his weapons of war,  were forward to go up into the hill-country.
Deut. And Jehovah said to me, Say to them, Do not go up, neither fight, for I am not among you, lest ye be smitten before your enemies.
Deut. So I spoke to you,  ye did not hearken,  ye rebelled against the commandment of Jehovah,  were presumptuous,  went up into the hill-country.
Deut. And the Amorites, who dwelt in that hill-country, came out against you,  chased you, as bees do,  beat you down in Seir, even to Hormah.
Deut. And ye returned and wept before Jehovah,  Jehovah did not hearken to your voice, nor gave ear to you.
Deut. So ye abode in Kadesh many days, according to the days that ye abode there.
Deut. Then we turned,  took our journey into the wilderness by the way to the Red Sea, as Jehovah spoke to me. And we encompassed mount Seir many days.
Deut. And Jehovah spoke to me, saying,
Deut. Ye have encompassed this mountain long enough, turn northward.
Deut. And command thou the people, saying, Ye are to pass through the border of your brothers the sons of Esau, who dwell in Seir,  they will be afraid of you. Take ye good heed to yourselves therefore.
Deut. Do not contend with them, for I will not give you of their land, no, not so much as for the sole of the foot to tread on, because I have given mount Seir to Esau for a possession.
Deut. Ye shall purchase food from them for money, that ye may eat,  ye shall also buy water from them for money, that ye may drink.
Deut. For Jehovah thy God has blessed thee in all the work of thy hand. He has known thy walking through this great wilderness. These forty years Jehovah thy God has been with thee; thou have lacked nothing.
Deut. So we passed by from our brothers the sons of Esau, who dwell in Seir, from the way of the Arabah from Elath and from Ezion-geber. And we turned and passed by the way of the wilderness of Moab.
Deut. And Jehovah said to me, Do not vex Moab, neither contend with them in battle, for I will not give thee of his land for a possession, because I have given Ar to the sons of Lot for a possession.
Deut. (The Emim dwelt in it formerly, a people great,  many,  tall, as the Anakim.
Deut. These also are accounted Rephaim, as the Anakim,  the Moabites call them Emim.
Deut. The Horites also dwelt in Seir formerly,  the sons of Esau succeeded them. And they destroyed them from before them,  dwelt in their stead, as Israel did to the land of his possession, which Jehovah gave to them.)
Deut. Now rise up,  get you over the brook Zered. And we went over the brook Zered.
Deut. And the days in which we came from Kadesh-barnea, until we came over the brook Zered, were thirty-eight years; until all the generation of the men of war were consumed from the midst of the camp, as Jehovah swore to them.
Deut. Moreover the hand of Jehovah was against them, to destroy them from the midst of the camp, until they were consumed.
Deut. So it came to pass, when all the men of war were consumed and dead from among the people,
Deut. that Jehovah spoke to me, saying,
Deut. Thou are this day to pass over Ar, the border of Moab.
Deut. And when thou come near opposite the sons of Ammon, do not vex them, nor contend with them, for I will not give thee of the land of the sons of Ammon for a possession, because I have given it to the sons of Lot for a possession.
Deut. (That also is accounted a land of Rephaim. Rephaim dwelt in it formerly,  the Ammonites call them Zamzummim,
Deut. a people great,  many,  tall, as the Anakim. But Jehovah destroyed them before them,  they succeeded them,  dwelt in their stead,
Deut. as he did for the sons of Esau, who dwell in Seir, when he destroyed the Horites from before them. And they succeeded them,  dwelt in their stead even to this day.
Deut. And the Avvim, who dwelt in villages as far as Gaza, the Caphtorim, who came forth out of Caphtor, destroyed them,  dwelt in their stead.)
Deut. Rise ye up, take your journey,  pass over the valley of the Arnon. Behold, I have given into thy hand Sihon the Amorite, king of Heshbon,  his land. Begin to possess it,  contend with him in battle.
Deut. This day I will begin to put the dread of thee and the fear of thee upon the peoples who are under the whole heaven, who shall hear the report of thee,  shall tremble,  be in anguish because of thee.
Deut. And I sent messengers out of the wilderness of Kedemoth to Sihon king of Heshbon with words of peace, saying,
Deut. Let me pass through thy land. I will go along by the highway, I will turn neither to the right hand nor to the left.
Deut. Thou shall sell me food for money, that I may eat,  give me water for money, that I may drink. Only let me pass through on my feet,
Deut. as the sons of Esau who dwell in Seir,  the Moabites who dwell in Ar, did to me, until I shall pass over the Jordan into the land which Jehovah our God gives us.
Deut. But Sihon king of Heshbon would not let us pass by him, for Jehovah thy God hardened his spirit,  made his heart obstinate, that he might deliver him into thy hand, as at this day.
Deut. And Jehovah said to me, Behold, I have begun to deliver up Sihon and his land before thee. Begin to possess, that thou may inherit his land.
Deut. Then Sihon came out against us, he and all his people, to battle at Jahaz.
Deut. And Jehovah our God delivered him up before us. And we smote him,  his sons,  all his people.
Deut. And we took all his cities at that time,  utterly destroyed every inhabited city, with the women and the little ones; we left none remaining.
Deut. We only took the cattle for a prey to ourselves, with the spoil of the cities which we had taken.
Deut. From Aroer, which is on the edge of the valley of the Arnon,  from the city that is in the valley, even to Gilead, there was not a city too high for us. Jehovah our God delivered up all before us.
Deut. Only to the land of the sons of Ammon thou did not come near, all the side of the river Jabbok,  the cities of the hill-country,  wherever Jehovah our God forbad us.
Deut. Then we turned,  went up the way to Bashan. And Og the king of Bashan came out against us, he and all his people, to battle at Edrei.
Deut. And Jehovah said to me, Fear him not, for I have delivered him,  all his people,  his land, into thy hand. And thou shall do to him as thou did to Sihon king of the Amorites, who dwelt at Heshbon.
Deut. So Jehovah our God delivered into our hand Og also, the king of Bashan,  all his people,  we smote him until none was left to him remaining.
Deut. And we took all his cities at that time. There was not a city which we did not take from them, sixty cities, all the region of Argob, the kingdom of Og in Bashan.
Deut. All these were cities fortified with high walls, gates,  bars; besides the un-walled towns a great many.
Deut. And we utterly destroyed them, as we did to Sihon king of Heshbon, utterly destroying every inhabited city, with the women and the little ones.
Deut. But all the cattle,  the spoil of the cities, we took for a prey to ourselves.
Deut. And we took the land at that time out of the hand of the two kings of the Amorites who were beyond the Jordan, from the valley of the Arnon to mount Hermon
Deut. (the Sidonians call Hermon, Sirion,  the Amorites call it Senir),
Deut. all the cities of the plain,  all Gilead,  all Bashan, to Salecah and Edrei, cities of the kingdom of Og in Bashan.
Deut. (For only Og king of Bashan remained of the remnant of the Rephaim. Behold, his bedstead was a bedstead of iron. Is it not in Rabbah of the sons of Ammon? Nine cubits was the length of it,  four cubits the breadth of it, after the cubit of a man.)
Deut. And we took this land in possession at that time. From Aroer, which is by the valley of the Arnon,  half the hill-country of Gilead,  the cities of it, I gave to the Reubenites and to the Gadites.
Deut. And the rest of Gilead,  all Bashan, the kingdom of Og, I gave to the half-tribe of Manasseh, all the region of Argob, even all Bashan. The same is called the land of Rephaim.
Deut. (Jair the son of Manasseh took all the region of Argob, to the border of the Geshurites and the Maacathites,  called them, even Bashan, after his own name, Havvoth-jair, to this day.)
Deut. And I gave Gilead to Machir.
Deut. And I gave to the Reubenites and to the Gadites from Gilead even to the valley of the Arnon, the middle of the valley,  the border of it, even to the river Jabbok, which is the border of the sons of Ammon,
Deut. also the Arabah,  the Jordan and the border of it, from Chinnereth even to the sea of the Arabah, the Salt Sea, under the slopes of Pisgah eastward.
Deut. And I commanded you at that time, saying, Jehovah your God has given you this land to possess it. Ye shall pass over armed before your brothers the sons of Israel, all the men of valor.
Deut. But your wives,  your little ones,  your cattle, (I know that ye have much cattle,) shall abide in your cities which I have given you
Deut. until Jehovah gives rest to your brothers, as to you,  they also possess the land which Jehovah your God gives them beyond the Jordan, then ye shall return every man to his possession, which I have given you.
Deut. And I commanded Joshua at that time, saying, Thine eyes have seen all that Jehovah your God has done to these two kings. So shall Jehovah do to all the kingdoms where thou go over.
Deut. Ye shall not fear them, for Jehovah your God, he it is who fights for you.
Deut. And I besought Jehovah at that time, saying,
Deut. O lord Jehovah, thou have begun to show thy servant thy greatness,  thy strong hand, for what god is there in heaven or in earth, that can do according to thy works,  according to thy mighty acts?
Deut. Let me go over, I pray thee,  see the good land that is beyond the Jordan, that goodly mountain,  Lebanon.
Deut. But Jehovah was angry with me because of you,  did not hearken to me. And Jehovah said to me, It shall be enough for thee. Speak no more to me of this matter.
Deut. Get thee up to the top of Pisgah,  lift up thine eyes westward,  northward,  southward,  eastward,  behold with thine eyes, for thou shall not go over this Jordan.
Deut. But charge Joshua,  encourage him,  strengthen him, for he shall go over before this people,  he shall cause them to inherit the land which thou shall see.
Deut. So we abode in the valley opposite Beth-peor.
Deut. And now, O Israel, hearken to the statutes and to the ordinances, which I teach you, to do them, that ye may live,  go in and possess the land which Jehovah, the God of your fathers, gives you.
Deut. Ye shall not add to the word which I command you, neither shall ye diminish from it, that ye may keep the commandments of Jehovah your God which I command you.
Deut. Your eyes have seen what Jehovah did because of Baal-peor. For all the men who followed Baal-peor, Jehovah thy God has destroyed them from the midst of thee.
Deut. But ye who clung to Jehovah your God are alive every one of you this day.
Deut. Behold, I have taught you statutes and ordinances, even as Jehovah my God commanded me, that ye should do so in the midst of the land where ye go in to possess it.
Deut. Keep therefore and do them, for this is your wisdom and your understanding in the sight of the peoples, who shall hear all these statutes,  say, Surely this great nation is a wise and understanding people.
Deut. For what great nation is there that has a god so near to them, as Jehovah our God is whenever we call upon him?
Deut. And what great nation is there that has statutes and ordinances so righteous as all this law, which I set before you this day?
Deut. Only take heed to thyself,  keep thy soul diligently, lest thou forget the things which thine eyes saw,  lest they depart from thy heart all the days of thy life,  make them known to thy sons and thy son's sons-
Deut. the day that thou stood before Jehovah thy God in Horeb, when Jehovah said to me, Assemble the people to me,  I will make them hear my words, that they may learn to fear me all the days that they live upon the earth,  that they may teach their sons.
Deut. And ye came near and stood under the mountain,  the mountain burned with fire to the heart of heaven, with darkness, cloud,  thick darkness.
Deut. And Jehovah spoke to you out of the midst of the fire. Ye heard the voice of words,  ye saw no form, only a voice.
Deut. And he declared to you his covenant, which he commanded you to perform, even the ten commandments. And he wrote them upon two tablets of stone.
Deut. And Jehovah commanded me at that time to teach you statutes and ordinances, that ye might do them in the land where ye go over to possess it.
Deut. Take ye therefore good heed to yourselves, for ye saw no manner of form on the day that Jehovah spoke to you in Horeb out of the midst of the fire.
Deut. Lest ye corrupt yourselves,  make for you a graven image in the form of any figure, the likeness of male or female,
Deut. the likeness of any beast that is on the earth, the likeness of any winged bird that flies in the sky,
Deut. the likeness of anything that creeps on the ground, the likeness of any fish that is in the water under the earth.
Deut. And lest thou lift up thine eyes to heaven,  when thou see the sun and the moon and the stars, even all the host of heaven, thou be drawn away and worship them,  serve them, which Jehovah thy God has allotted to all the peoples under the whole heaven.
Deut. But Jehovah has taken you,  brought you forth out of the iron furnace, out of Egypt, to be to him a people of inheritance, as at this day.
Deut. Furthermore Jehovah was angry with me because of you,  swore that I would not go over the Jordan,  that I would not go in to that good land, which Jehovah thy God gives thee for an inheritance,
Deut. but I must die in this land. I must not go over the Jordan,  ye shall go over,  possess that good land.
Deut. Take heed to yourselves, lest ye forget the covenant of Jehovah your God, which he made with you,  make you a graven image in the form of anything which Jehovah thy God has forbidden thee.
Deut. For Jehovah thy God is a consuming fire, a jealous God.
Deut. When thou shall beget sons,  son's sons,  ye shall have been long in the land,  shall corrupt yourselves,  make a graven image in the form of anything,  shall do that which is evil in the sight of Jehovah thy God, to provoke him to anger,
Deut. I call heaven and earth to witness against you this day, that ye shall soon utterly perish from off the land to which ye go over the Jordan to possess it. Ye shall not prolong your days upon it,  shall be utterly destroyed.
Deut. And Jehovah will scatter you among the peoples,  ye shall be left few in number among the nations where Jehovah shall lead you away.
Deut. And there ye shall serve gods, the work of men's hands, wood and stone, which neither see, nor hear, nor eat, nor smell.
Deut. But from there ye shall seek Jehovah thy God. And thou shall find him when thou search after him with all thy heart and with all thy soul.
Deut. When thou are in tribulation,  all these things have come upon thee, in the latter days thou shall return to Jehovah thy God,  hearken to his voice.
Deut. For Jehovah thy God is a merciful God. He will not fail thee, neither destroy thee, nor forget the covenant of thy fathers which he swore to them.
Deut. For ask now of the days that are past, which were before thee, since the day that God created man upon the earth,  from the one end of heaven to the other, whether there has been anything as this great thing is, or has been heard like it?
Deut. Did a people ever hear the voice of God speaking out of the midst of the fire, as thou have heard,  live?
Deut. Or has God assayed to go and take for him a nation from the midst of another nation, by trials, by signs,  by wonders,  by war,  by a mighty hand,  by an outstretched arm,  by great terrors, according to all that Jehovah your God did for you in Egypt before your eyes?
Deut. It was shown to thee, that thou might know that Jehovah he is God. There is none else besides him.
Deut. Out of heaven he made thee to hear his voice, that he might instruct thee. And upon earth he made thee to see his great fire,  thou heard his words out of the midst of the fire.
Deut. And because he loved thy fathers, therefore he chose their seed after them,  brought thee out with his presence, with his great power, out of Egypt,
Deut. to drive out nations from before thee greater and mightier than thou, to bring thee in, to give thee their land for an inheritance, as at this day.
Deut. Know therefore this day,  lay it to thy heart, that Jehovah he is God in heaven above and upon the earth beneath. There is none else.
Deut. And thou shall keep his statutes,  his commandments, which I command thee this day, that it may go well with thee,  with thy sons after thee,  that thou may prolong thy days in the land, which Jehovah thy God gives thee, forever.
Deut. Then Moses set apart three cities beyond the Jordan toward the sunrise,
Deut. that the manslayer might flee there, who kills his neighbor unawares,  did not hate him in time past,  that fleeing to one of these cities he might live:
Deut. namely, Bezer in the wilderness, in the plain country, for the Reubenites; and Ramoth in Gilead, for the Gadites; and Golan in Bashan, for the Manassites.
Deut. And this is the law which Moses set before the sons of Israel.
Deut. These are the testimonies,  the statutes,  the ordinances, which Moses spoke to the sons of Israel, when they came forth out of Egypt,
Deut. beyond the Jordan, in the valley opposite Beth-peor, in the land of Sihon king of the Amorites, who dwelt at Heshbon, whom Moses and the sons of Israel smote when they came forth out of Egypt.
Deut. And they took his land in possession,  the land of Og king of Bashan, the two kings of the Amorites, who were beyond the Jordan toward the sunrise,
Deut. from Aroer, which is on the edge of the valley of the Arnon, even to mount Sion (the same is Hermon),
Deut. and all the Arabah beyond the Jordan eastward, even to the sea of the Arabah, under the slopes of Pisgah.
Deut. And Moses called to all Israel,  said to them, Hear, O Israel, the statutes and the ordinances which I speak in your ears this day, that ye may learn them,  observe to do them.
Deut. Jehovah our God made a covenant with us in Horeb.
Deut. Jehovah did not make this covenant with our fathers,  with us, even us, who are all of us here alive this day.
Deut. Jehovah spoke with you face to face in the mount out of the midst of the fire
Deut. (I stood between Jehovah and you at that time, to show you the word of Jehovah, for ye were afraid because of the fire,  did not go up onto the mount), saying,
Deut. I am Jehovah thy God who brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.
Deut. Thou shall have no other gods before me.
Deut. Thou shall not make to thee a graven image: any likeness that is in heaven above, or that is on the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth.
Deut. Thou shall not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them, for I, Jehovah thy God, am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the sons,  upon the third and upon the fourth generation of those who hate me,
Deut. and showing loving kindness to thousands of those who love me and keep my commandments.
Deut. Thou shall not take the name of Jehovah thy God in vain, for Jehovah will not hold him guiltless who takes his name in vain.
Deut. Observe the sabbath day, to keep it holy, as Jehovah thy God commanded thee.
Deut. Six days thou shall labor,  do all thy work,
Deut. but the seventh day is a sabbath to Jehovah thy God: thou shall not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, nor thy man-servant, nor thy maid-servant, nor thine ox, nor thy donkey, nor any of thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates, that thy man-servant and thy maid-servant may rest as well as thou.
Deut. And thou shall remember that thou were a servant in the land of Egypt,  Jehovah thy God brought thee out from there by a mighty hand and by an outstretched arm, therefore Jehovah thy God commanded thee to keep the sabbath day.
Deut. Honor thy father and thy mother, as Jehovah thy God commanded thee, that thy days may be long,  that it may go well with thee in the land which Jehovah thy God gives thee.
Deut. Thou shall not murder.
Deut. Neither shall thou commit adultery.
Deut. Neither shall thou steal.
Deut. Neither shall thou bear false witness against thy neighbor.
Deut. Neither shall thou covet thy neighbor's wife. Neither shall thou desire thy neighbor's house, his field, or his man-servant, or his maid-servant, his ox, or his donkey, or anything that is thy neighbor's.
Deut. These words Jehovah spoke to all your assembly on the mount out of the midst of the fire, of the cloud,  of the thick darkness, with a great voice,  he added no more. And he wrote them upon two tablets of stone,  gave them to me.
Deut. And it came to pass, when ye heard the voice out of the midst of the darkness, while the mountain was burning with fire, that ye came near to me, even all the heads of your tribes,  your elders.
Deut. And ye said, Behold, Jehovah our God has shown us his glory and his greatness,  we have heard his voice out of the midst of the fire. We have seen this day that God speaks with man,  he lives.
Deut. Now therefore why should we die? For this great fire will consume us. If we hear the voice of Jehovah our God any more, then we shall die.
Deut. For who is there of all flesh, who has heard the voice of the living God speaking out of the midst of the fire, as we have,  lived?
Deut. Go thou near,  hear all that Jehovah our God shall say. And speak thou to us all that Jehovah our God shall speak to thee,  we will hear it,  do it.
Deut. And Jehovah heard the voice of your words, when ye spoke to me. And Jehovah said to me, I have heard the voice of the words of this people, which they have spoken to thee. They have well said all that they have spoken.
Deut. Oh that there were such a heart in them that they would fear me,  keep all my commandments always, that it might be well with them,  with their sons forever!
Deut. Go say to them, Return ye to your tents.
Deut. But as for thee, stand thou here by me,  I will speak to thee all the commandment,  the statutes,  the ordinances, which thou shall teach them, that they may do them in the land which I give them to possess it.
Deut. Ye shall observe to do therefore as Jehovah your God has commanded you. Ye shall not turn aside to the right hand or to the left.
Deut. Ye shall walk in all the way which Jehovah your God has commanded you, that ye may live,  that it may be well with you,  that ye may prolong your days in the land which ye shall possess.
Deut. Now this is the commandment, the statutes and the ordinances, which Jehovah your God commanded to teach you, that ye might do them in the land where ye go over to possess it,
Deut. that thou might fear Jehovah thy God, to keep all his statutes and his commandments, which I command thee, thou,  thy son,  thy son's son, all the days of thy life,  that thy days may be prolonged.
Deut. Hear therefore, O Israel,  observe to do it, that it may be well with thee,  that ye may increase mightily, as Jehovah, the God of thy fathers, has promised to thee, in a land flowing with milk and honey.
Deut. Hear, O Israel: Jehovah our God is one Jehovah.
Deut. And thou shall love Jehovah thy God with all thy heart,  with all thy soul,  with all thy might.
Deut. And these words, which I command thee this day, shall be upon thy heart.
Deut. And thou shall teach them diligently to thy sons,  shall talk of them when thou sit in thy house,  when thou walk by the way,  when thou lie down,  when thou rise up.
Deut. And thou shall bind them for a sign upon thy hand,  they shall be for frontlets between thine eyes.
Deut. And thou shall write them upon the door-posts of thy house,  upon thy gates.
Deut. And it shall be, when Jehovah thy God shall bring thee into the land which he swore to thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac,  to Jacob, to give thee, great and goodly cities, which thou did not build,
Deut. and houses full of all good things, which thou did not fill,  cisterns hewn out, which thou did not hew, vineyards and olive trees, which thou did not plant,  thou shall eat and be full,
Deut. then beware lest thou forget Jehovah, who brought thee forth out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.
Deut. Thou shall fear Jehovah thy God,  him thou shall serve,  shall swear by his name.
Deut. Ye shall not go after other gods, of the gods of the peoples that are round about you,
Deut. for Jehovah thy God in the midst of thee is a jealous God, lest the anger of Jehovah thy God be kindled against thee,  he destroy thee from off the face of the earth.
Deut. Ye shall not challenge Jehovah your God, as ye challenged him in Massah.
Deut. Ye shall diligently keep the commandments of Jehovah your God,  his testimonies,  his statutes, which he has commanded thee.
Deut. And thou shall do that which is right and good in the sight of Jehovah, that it may be well with thee,  that thou may go in and possess the good land which Jehovah swore to thy fathers,
Deut. to thrust out all thine enemies from before thee, as Jehovah has spoken.
Deut. When thy son asks thee in time to come, saying, What is the meaning of the testimonies,  the statutes,  the ordinances, which Jehovah our God has commanded you?
Deut. Then thou shall say to thy son, We were Pharaoh's bondmen in Egypt,  Jehovah brought us out of Egypt with a mighty hand.
Deut. And Jehovah showed signs and wonders, great and grievous, upon Egypt, upon Pharaoh,  upon all his house, before our eyes.
Deut. And he brought us out from there that he might bring us in to give us the land which he swore to our fathers.
Deut. And Jehovah commanded us to do all these statutes, to fear Jehovah our God for our good always, that he might preserve us alive as at this day.
Deut. And it shall be righteousness to us, if we observe to do all this commandment before Jehovah our God as he has commanded us.
Deut. When Jehovah thy God shall bring thee into the land where thou go to possess it,  shall cast out many nations before thee, the Hittite,  the Girgashite,  the Amorite,  the Canaanite,  the Perizzite,  the Hivite,  the Jebusite, seven nations greater and mightier than thou,
Deut. and when Jehovah thy God shall deliver them up before thee,  thou shall smite them, then thou shall utterly destroy them. Thou shall make no covenant with them, nor show mercy to them.
Deut. Neither shall thou make marriages with them. Thy daughter thou shall not give to his son, nor his daughter shall thou take to thy son.
Deut. For he will turn away thy son from following me, that they may serve other gods, so the anger of Jehovah will be kindled against you,  he will destroy thee quickly.
Deut. But thus shall ye deal with them: Ye shall break down their altars,  dash in pieces their pillars,  hew down their Asherim,  burn their graven images with fire.
Deut. For thou are a holy people to Jehovah thy God. Jehovah thy God has chosen thee to be a people for his own possession, above all peoples that are upon the face of the earth.
Deut. Jehovah did not set his love upon you, nor choose you, because ye were more in number than any people, for ye were the fewest of all peoples,
Deut. but because Jehovah loves you. And because he would keep the oath which he swore to your fathers, Jehovah has brought you out with a mighty hand,  redeemed you out of the house of bondage, from the hand of Pharaoh king of Egypt.
Deut. Know therefore that Jehovah thy God, he is God, the faithful God, who keeps covenant and loving kindness with those who love him and keep his commandments to a thousand generations,
Deut. and repays those who hate him to their face, to destroy them. He will not be slack to him who hates him. He will repay him to his face.
Deut. Thou shall therefore keep the commandment,  the statutes,  the ordinances, which I command thee this day, to do them.
Deut. And it shall come to pass, because ye hearken to these ordinances,  keep and do them, that Jehovah thy God will keep with thee the covenant and the loving kindness which he swore to thy fathers.
Deut. And he will love thee,  bless thee,  multiply thee. He will also bless the fruit of thy body and the fruit of thy ground, thy grain and thy new wine and thine oil, the increase of thy cattle and the young of thy flock, in the land which he swore to thy fathers to give thee.
Deut. Thou shall be blessed above all peoples. There shall not be male or female barren among you, or among your cattle.
Deut. And Jehovah will take away from thee all sickness. And none of the evil diseases of Egypt, which thou know, will he put upon thee,  will lay them upon all those who hate thee.
Deut. And thou shall consume all the peoples that Jehovah thy God shall deliver to thee. Thine eye shall not pity them. Neither shall thou serve their gods, for that will be a snare to thee.
Deut. If thou shall say in thy heart, These nations are more than I. How can I dispossess them?
Deut. Thou shall not be afraid of them. Thou shall remember well what Jehovah thy God did to Pharaoh,  to all Egypt:
Deut. the great trials which thine eyes saw,  the signs,  the wonders,  the mighty hand,  the outstretched arm by which Jehovah thy God brought thee out. So shall Jehovah thy God do to all the peoples of whom thou are afraid.
Deut. Moreover Jehovah thy God will send the hornet among them until those who are left and hide themselves perish from before thee.
Deut. Thou shall not be frightened at them, for Jehovah thy God is in the midst of thee, a great God and awesome.
Deut. And Jehovah thy God will cast out those nations before thee little by little. Thou may not consume them at once, lest the beasts of the field increase upon thee.
Deut. But Jehovah thy God will deliver them up before thee,  will discomfit them with a great confusion until they be destroyed.
Deut. And he will deliver their kings into thy hand,  thou shall make their name to perish from under heaven. There shall no man be able to stand before thee, until thou have destroyed them.
Deut. Ye shall burn the graven images of their gods with fire. Thou shall not covet the silver or the gold that is on them, nor take it to thee, lest thou be snared by it, for it is an abomination to Jehovah thy God.
Deut. And thou shall not bring an abomination into thy house,  become a devoted thing like it. Thou shall utterly detest it,  thou shall utterly abhor it, for it is a cursed thing.
Deut. All the commandment which I command thee this day ye shall observe to do, that ye may live,  multiply,  go in and possess the land which Jehovah swore to your fathers.
Deut. And thou shall remember all the way which Jehovah thy God has led thee these forty years in the wilderness, that he might humble thee, to prove thee, to know what was in thy heart, whether thou would keep his commandments, or not.
Deut. And he humbled thee,  allowed thee to hunger,  fed thee with manna, which thou knew not, neither did thy fathers know, that he might make thee know that man does not live by bread alone,  man lives by everything that proceeds out of the mouth of Jehovah.
Deut. Thy raiment did not grow old upon thee, neither did thy foot swell, these forty years.
Deut. And thou shall consider in thy heart, that, as a man chastens his son, so Jehovah thy God chastens thee.
Deut. And thou shall keep the commandments of Jehovah thy God, to walk in his ways,  to fear him.
Deut. For Jehovah thy God brings thee into a good land, a land of brooks of water, of fountains and springs, flowing forth in valleys and hills;
Deut. a land of wheat and barley,  vines and fig trees and pomegranates, a land of olive trees and honey,
Deut. a land in which thou shall eat bread without scarceness. Thou shall not lack anything in it, a land whose stones are iron,  out of whose hills thou may dig copper.
Deut. And thou shall eat and be full,  thou shall bless Jehovah thy God for the good land which he has given thee.
Deut. Beware lest thou forget Jehovah thy God, in not keeping his commandments,  his ordinances,  his statutes, which I command thee this day.
Deut. Lest, when thou have eaten and are full,  have built goodly houses,  dwelt in it,
Deut. and when thy herds and thy flocks multiply,  thy silver and thy gold is multiplied,  all that thou have is multiplied,
Deut. then thy heart be lifted up,  thou forget Jehovah thy God, who brought thee forth out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage,
Deut. who led thee through the great and terrible wilderness-fiery serpents and scorpions,  thirsty ground where was no water-who brought thee forth water out of the rock of flint,
Deut. who fed thee in the wilderness with manna, which thy fathers did not know, that he might humble thee,  that he might prove thee, to do thee good at thy latter end.
Deut. And lest thou say in thy heart, My power and the might of my hand has gotten me this wealth.
Deut. But thou shall remember Jehovah thy God, for it is he who gives thee power to get wealth, that he may establish his covenant which he swore to thy fathers, as at this day.
Deut. And it shall be, if thou shall forget Jehovah thy God,  walk after other gods,  serve them,  worship them, I testify against you this day that ye shall surely perish.
Deut. As the nations that Jehovah makes to perish before you, so shall ye perish, because ye would not hearken to the voice of Jehovah your God.
Deut. Hear, O Israel: Thou are to pass over the Jordan this day, to go in to dispossess nations greater and mightier than thyself, cities great and fortified up to heaven,
Deut. a people great and tall, the sons of the Anakim, whom thou know,  of whom thou have heard say, Who can stand before the sons of Anak?
Deut. Know therefore this day, that Jehovah thy God is he who goes over before thee as a devouring fire. He will destroy them,  he will bring them down before thee. So thou shall drive them out,  make them to perish quickly, as Jehovah has spoken to thee.
Deut. Do not speak thou in thy heart, after Jehovah thy God has thrust them out from before thee, saying, For my righteousness Jehovah has brought me in to possess this land. Whereas for the wickedness of these nations Jehovah drives them out from before thee.
Deut. Not for thy righteousness, or for the uprightness of thy heart, do thou go in to possess their land,  for the wickedness of these nations Jehovah thy God drives them out from before thee,  that he may establish the word which Jehovah swore to thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac,  to Jacob.
Deut. Know therefore, that Jehovah thy God does not give thee this good land to possess it for thy righteousness, for thou are a stiff-necked people.
Deut. Remember, do not thou forget how thou provoked Jehovah thy God to wrath in the wilderness. From the day that thou went forth out of the land of Egypt, until ye came to this place, ye have been rebellious against Jehovah.
Deut. Also in Horeb ye provoked Jehovah to wrath,  Jehovah was angry with you to destroy you.
Deut. When I was gone up onto the mount to receive the tablets of stone, even the tablets of the covenant which Jehovah made with you, then I abode on the mount forty days and forty nights. I neither ate bread nor drank water.
Deut. And Jehovah delivered to me the two tablets of stone written with the finger of God. And on them was according to all the words, which Jehovah spoke with you in the mount out of the midst of the fire in the day of the assembly.
Deut. And it came to pass, at the end of forty days and forty nights, that Jehovah gave me the two tablets of stone, even the tablets of the covenant.
Deut. And Jehovah said to me, Arise, get thee down quickly from here, for thy people that thou have brought forth out of Egypt have corrupted themselves. They have quickly turned aside out of the way which I commanded them. They have made them a molten image.
Deut. Furthermore Jehovah spoke to me, saying, I have seen this people, , behold, it is a stiff-necked people.
Deut. Let me alone, that I may destroy them,  blot out their name from under heaven,  I will make of thee a nation mightier and greater than they.
Deut. So I turned and came down from the mount,  the mount was burning with fire. And the two tablets of the covenant were in my two hands.
Deut. And I looked, , behold, ye had sinned against Jehovah your God. Ye had made you a molten calf. Ye had turned aside quickly out of the way which Jehovah had commanded you.
Deut. And I took hold of the two tablets,  cast them out of my two hands,  broke them before your eyes.
Deut. And I fell down before Jehovah, as at the first, forty days and forty nights. I neither ate bread nor drank water, because of all your sin which ye sinned, in doing that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah, to provoke him to anger.
Deut. For I was afraid of the anger and hot displeasure with which Jehovah was angry against you to destroy you. But Jehovah hearkened to me that time also.
Deut. And Jehovah was very angry with Aaron to destroy him. And I prayed for Aaron also at the same time.
Deut. And I took your sin, the calf which ye had made,  burnt it with fire,  stamped it, grinding it very small, until it was as fine as dust. And I cast the dust of it into the brook that descended out of the mount.
Deut. And at Taberah,  at Massah,  at Kibroth-hattaavah, ye provoked Jehovah to wrath.
Deut. And when Jehovah sent you from Kadesh-barnea, saying, Go up and possess the land which I have given you, then ye rebelled against the commandment of Jehovah your God,  ye did not believe him, nor hearken to his voice.
Deut. Ye have been rebellious against Jehovah from the day that I knew you.
Deut. So I fell down before Jehovah the forty days and forty nights that I fell down, because Jehovah had said he would destroy you.
Deut. And I prayed to Jehovah,  said, O lord Jehovah, destroy not thy people and thine inheritance, that thou have redeemed through thy greatness, that thou have brought forth out of Egypt with a mighty hand.
Deut. Remember thy servants, Abraham, Isaac,  Jacob. Look not to the stubbornness of this people, nor to their profaneness, nor to their sin,
Deut. lest the land from where thou brought us out say, Because Jehovah was not able to bring them into the land which he promised to them,  because he hated them, he has brought them out to kill them in the wilderness.
Deut. Yet they are thy people and thine inheritance, which thou brought out by thy great power and by thine outstretched arm.
Deut. At that time Jehovah said to me, Hew thee two tablets of stone like the first,  come up to me onto the mount,  make thee an ark of wood.
Deut. And I will write on the tablets the words that were on the first tablets which thou broke,  thou shall put them in the ark.
Deut. So I made an ark of acacia wood,  hewed two tablets of stone like the first,  went up onto the mount, having the two tablets in my hand.
Deut. And he wrote on the tablets according to the first writing, the ten commandments, which Jehovah spoke to you in the mount out of the midst of the fire in the day of the assembly,  Jehovah gave them to me.
Deut. And I turned and came down from the mount,  put the tablets in the ark which I had made. And they are there as Jehovah commanded me.
Deut. (And the sons of Israel journeyed from Beeroth Bene-jaakan to Moserah. There Aaron died,  there he was buried,  Eleazar his son ministered in the priest's office in his stead.
Deut. From there they journeyed to Gudgodah,  from Gudgodah to Jotbathah, a land of brooks of water.
Deut. At that time Jehovah set apart the tribe of Levi, to bear the ark of the covenant of Jehovah, to stand before Jehovah to minister to him,  to bless in his name, to this day.
Deut. Therefore Levi has no portion nor inheritance with his brothers. Jehovah is his inheritance, according as Jehovah thy God spoke to him.)
Deut. And I stayed on the mount as at the first time, forty days and forty nights,  Jehovah hearkened to me that time also: Jehovah would not destroy thee.
Deut. And Jehovah said to me, Arise, take thy journey before the people,  they shall go in and possess the land, which I swore to their fathers to give to them.
Deut. And now, Israel, what does Jehovah thy God require of thee,  to fear Jehovah thy God, to walk in all his ways,  to love him,  to serve Jehovah thy God with all thy heart and with all thy soul,
Deut. to keep the commandments of Jehovah,  his statutes, which I command thee this day for thy good?
Deut. Behold, to Jehovah thy God belongs heaven and the heaven of heavens, the earth, with all that is in it.
Deut. Only Jehovah had a delight in thy fathers to love them,  he chose their seed after them, even you above all peoples as at this day.
Deut. Circumcise therefore the foreskin of your heart,  be no more stiff-necked.
Deut. For Jehovah your God, he is God of gods,  Lord of lords, the great God, the mighty,  the awesome, who regards not persons, nor takes reward.
Deut. He executes justice for the fatherless and widow,  loves the sojourner in giving him food and raiment.
Deut. Love ye therefore the sojourner, for ye were sojourners in the land of Egypt.
Deut. Thou shall fear Jehovah thy God. Him thou shall serve,  to him thou shall cling,  by his name thou shall swear.
Deut. He is thy praise,  he is thy God, who has done for thee these great and awesome things, which thine eyes have seen.
Deut. Thy fathers went down into Egypt, in souls, seventy. And now Jehovah thy God has made thee as the stars of heaven for multitude.
Deut. Therefore thou shall love Jehovah thy God,  keep his charge,  his statutes,  his ordinances,  his commandments, always.
Deut. And ye know this day, for it is not with your sons who have not known,  who have not seen the chastisement of Jehovah your God, his greatness, his mighty hand,  his outstretched arm,
Deut. and his signs,  his works, which he did in the midst of Egypt to Pharaoh the king of Egypt,  to all his land,
Deut. and what he did to the army of Egypt, to their horses,  to their chariots, how he made the water of the Red Sea to overflow them as they pursued after you,  how Jehovah has destroyed them to this day,
Deut. and what he did to you in the wilderness, until ye came to this place,
Deut. and what he did to Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab, the son of Reuben, how the earth opened its mouth,  swallowed them up,  their households,  their tents,  every living thing that followed them, in the midst of all Israel,
Deut. but your eyes have seen all the great work of Jehovah which he did.
Deut. Therefore ye shall keep all the commandment which I command thee this day, that ye may be strong,  go in and possess the land, where ye go over to possess it,
Deut. and that ye may prolong your days in the land, which Jehovah swore to your fathers to give to them and to their seed, a land flowing with milk and honey.
Deut. For the land, where thou go in to possess it, is not as the land of Egypt, from where ye came out, where thou sowed thy seed,  watered it with thy foot, as a garden of herbs,
Deut. but the land, where ye go over to possess it, is a land of hills and valleys,  drinks water from the rain of heaven,
Deut. a land which Jehovah thy God cares for. The eyes of Jehovah thy God are always upon it, from the beginning of the year even to the end of the year.
Deut. And it shall come to pass, if ye shall hearken diligently to my commandments which I command you this day, to love Jehovah your God,  to serve him with all your heart and with all your soul,
Deut. that I will give the rain of your land in its season, the former rain and the latter rain, that thou may gather in thy grain,  thy new wine,  thine oil.
Deut. And I will give grass in thy fields for thy cattle,  thou shall eat and be full.
Deut. Take heed to yourselves, lest your heart be deceived,  ye turn aside,  serve other gods,  worship them,
Deut. and the anger of Jehovah be kindled against you,  he shut up the heavens, so that there shall be no rain,  the land shall not yield its fruit,  ye perish quickly from off the good land which Jehovah gives you.
Deut. Therefore ye shall lay up these my words in your heart and in your soul. And ye shall bind them for a sign upon your hand,  they shall be for frontlets between your eyes.
Deut. And ye shall teach them to your sons, talking of them when thou sit in thy house,  when thou walk by the way,  when thou lie down,  when thou rise up.
Deut. And thou shall write them upon the door-posts of thy house,  upon thy gates,
Deut. that your days may be multiplied,  the days of your sons, in the land which Jehovah swore to your fathers to give them, as the days of the heavens above the earth.
Deut. For if ye shall diligently keep all this commandment which I command you, to do it, to love Jehovah your God, to walk in all his ways,  to cling to him,
Deut. then will Jehovah drive out all these nations from before you,  ye shall dispossess nations greater and mightier than yourselves.
Deut. Every place on which the sole of your foot shall tread shall be yours, from the wilderness,  Lebanon, from the river, the river Euphrates, even to the hinder sea shall be your border.
Deut. There shall no man be able to stand before you. Jehovah your God shall lay the fear of you and the dread of you upon all the land that ye shall tread upon, as he has spoken to you.
Deut. Behold, I set before you this day a blessing and a curse:
Deut. the blessing, if ye shall hearken to the commandments of Jehovah your God, which I command you this day,
Deut. and the curse, if ye shall not hearken to the commandments of Jehovah your God,  turn aside out of the way which I command you this day to go after other gods, which ye have not known.
Deut. And it shall come to pass, when Jehovah thy God shall bring thee into the land where thou go to possess it, that thou shall set the blessing upon mount Gerizim,  the curse upon mount Ebal.
Deut. Are they not beyond the Jordan, behind the way of the going down of the sun, in the land of the Canaanites who dwell in the Arabah, opposite Gilgal, beside the oaks of Moreh?
Deut. For ye are to pass over the Jordan to go in to possess the land which Jehovah your God gives you,  ye shall possess it,  dwell in it.
Deut. And ye shall observe to do all the statutes and the ordinances which I set before you this day.
Deut. These are the statutes and the ordinances which ye shall observe to do in the land which Jehovah, the God of thy fathers, has given thee to possess it all the days that ye live upon the earth.
Deut. Ye shall surely destroy all the places in which the nations that ye shall dispossess served their gods, upon the high mountains,  upon the hills,  under every green tree.
Deut. And ye shall break down their altars,  dash in pieces their pillars,  burn their Asherim with fire. And ye shall hew down the graven images of their gods,  ye shall destroy their name out of that place.
Deut. Ye shall not do so to Jehovah your God.
Deut. But to the place which Jehovah your God shall choose out of all your tribes, to put his name there, even to his habitation ye shall seek,  there thou shall come.
Deut. And there ye shall bring your burnt offerings,  your sacrifices,  your tithes,  the heave offering of your hand,  your vows,  your freewill offerings,  the firstlings of your herd and of your flock.
Deut. And there ye shall eat before Jehovah your God,  ye shall rejoice in all that ye put your hand to, ye and your households, in which Jehovah thy God has blessed thee.
Deut. Ye shall not do after all the things that we do here this day, every man whatever is right in his own eyes.
Deut. For ye are not as yet come to the rest and to the inheritance, which Jehovah thy God gives thee.
Deut. But when ye go over the Jordan,  dwell in the land which Jehovah your God causes you to inherit,  he gives you rest from all your enemies round about, so that ye dwell in safety,
Deut. then it shall come to pass that to the place which Jehovah your God shall choose to cause his name to dwell there, there ye shall bring all that I command you: your burnt offerings,  your sacrifices, your tithes,  the heave offering of your hand,  all your choice vows which ye vow to Jehovah.
Deut. And ye shall rejoice before Jehovah your God, ye,  your sons,  your daughters,  your men-servants,  your maid-servants,  the Levite who is within your gates-inasmuch as he has no portion nor inheritance with you.
Deut. Take heed to thyself that thou offer not thy burnt offerings in every place that thou see,
Deut. but in the place which Jehovah shall choose in one of thy tribes. There thou shall offer thy burnt offerings,  there thou shall do all that I command thee.
Deut. Notwithstanding, thou may kill and eat flesh within all thy gates, after all the desire of thy soul, according to the blessing of Jehovah thy God which he has given thee, the unclean and the clean may eat of it, as of the gazelle,  as of the hart.
Deut. Only ye shall not eat the blood. Thou shall pour it out upon the ground as water.
Deut. Thou may not eat within thy gates the tithe of thy grain, or of thy new wine, or of thine oil, or the firstlings of thy herd or of thy flock, nor any of thy vows which thou vow, nor thy freewill offerings, nor the heave offering of thy hand.
Deut. But thou shall eat them before Jehovah thy God in the place which Jehovah thy God shall choose, thou,  thy son,  thy daughter,  thy man-servant,  thy maid-servant,  the Levite who is within thy gates. And thou shall rejoice before Jehovah thy God in all that thou put thy hand to.
Deut. Take heed to thyself that thou not forsake the Levite as long as thou live in thy land.
Deut. When Jehovah thy God shall enlarge thy border, as he has promised thee,  thou shall say, I will eat flesh, because thy soul desires to eat flesh, thou may eat flesh, after all the desire of thy soul.
Deut. If the place which Jehovah thy God shall choose, to put his name there, be too far from thee, then thou shall kill of thy herd and of thy flock, which Jehovah has given thee, as I have commanded thee,  thou may eat within thy gates, according to all the desire of thy soul.
Deut. Even as the gazelle and as the hart is eaten, so thou shall eat of it. The unclean and the clean may eat of it alike.
Deut. Only be sure that thou not eat the blood. For the blood is the life,  thou shall not eat the life with the flesh.
Deut. Thou shall not eat it. Thou shall pour it out upon the ground as water.
Deut. Thou shall not eat it, that it may go well with thee,  with thy sons after thee, when thou shall do that which is right in the eyes of Jehovah.
Deut. Only thy holy things which thou have,  thy vows, thou shall take,  go to the place which Jehovah shall choose.
Deut. And thou shall offer thy burnt offerings, the flesh and the blood, upon the altar of Jehovah thy God,  the blood of thy sacrifices shall be poured out upon the altar of Jehovah thy God,  thou shall eat the flesh.
Deut. Observe and hear all these words which I command thee, that it may go well with thee,  with thy sons after thee forever, when thou do that which is good and right in the eyes of Jehovah thy God.
Deut. When Jehovah thy God shall cut off the nations from before thee, where thou go in to dispossess them,  thou dispossess them,  dwell in their land,
Deut. take heed to thyself that thou be not ensnared to follow them, after they are destroyed from before thee,  that thou not inquire after their gods, saying, How do these nations serve their gods? Even so I will do likewise.
Deut. Thou shall not do so to Jehovah thy God. For every abomination to Jehovah, which he hates, they have done to their gods, for they even burn their sons and their daughters in the fire to their gods.
Deut. Whatever thing I command you, that shall ye observe to do. Thou shall not add to it, nor diminish from it.
Deut. If there arise in the midst of thee a prophet, or a dreamer of dreams,  he gives thee a sign or a wonder,
Deut. and the sign or the wonder comes to pass, of which he spoke to thee, saying, Let us go after other gods, which thou have not known,  let us serve them,
Deut. thou shall not hearken to the words of that prophet, or to that dreamer of dreams, for Jehovah your God proves you, to know whether ye love Jehovah your God with all your heart and with all your soul.
Deut. Ye shall walk after Jehovah your God,  fear him,  keep his commandments,  obey his voice,  ye shall serve him,  cling to him.
Deut. And that prophet, or that dreamer of dreams, shall be put to death, because he has spoken rebellion against Jehovah your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt,  redeemed thee out of the house of bondage, to draw thee aside out of the way which Jehovah thy God commanded thee to walk in. So shall thou put away the evil from the midst of thee.
Deut. If thy brother, the son of thy mother, or thy son, or thy daughter, or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend, who is as thine own soul, entices thee secretly, saying, Let us go and serve other gods, which thou have not known, thou, nor thy fathers,
Deut. of the gods of the peoples that are round about you, near to thee, or far off from thee, from the one end of the earth even to the other end of the earth,
Deut. thou shall not consent to him, nor hearken to him. Neither shall thine eye pity him, neither shall thou spare, neither shall thou conceal him,
Deut. but thou shall surely kill him. Thy hand shall be first upon him to put him to death,  afterwards the hand of all the people.
Deut. And thou shall stone him to death with stones, because he has sought to draw thee away from Jehovah thy God, who brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.
Deut. And all Israel shall hear,  fear,  shall no more do any such wickedness as this is in the midst of thee.
Deut. If thou shall hear tell concerning one of thy cities, which Jehovah thy God gives thee to dwell there, saying,
Deut. Certain base fellows have gone out from the midst of thee,  have drawn away the inhabitants of their city, saying, Let us go and serve other gods, which ye have not known,
Deut. then thou shall inquire,  make search,  ask diligently. And, behold, if it be true,  the thing certain, that such abomination is wrought in the midst of thee,
Deut. thou shall surely smite the inhabitants of that city with the edge of the sword, destroying it utterly,  all that is in it,  the cattle in it, with the edge of the sword.
Deut. And thou shall gather all the spoil of it into the midst of the street of it,  shall burn the city with fire,  all the spoil of it, every whit, to Jehovah thy God,  it shall be a heap forever. It shall not be built again.
Deut. And nothing of the devoted thing shall cling to thy hand, that Jehovah may turn from the fierceness of his anger,  show thee mercy,  have compassion upon thee,  multiply thee, as he has sworn to thy fathers,
Deut. when thou shall hearken to the voice of Jehovah thy God, to keep all his commandments which I command thee this day, to do that which is right in the eyes of Jehovah thy God.
Deut. Ye are the sons of Jehovah your God. Ye shall not cut yourselves, nor make any baldness between your eyes for the dead.
Deut. For thou are a holy people to Jehovah thy God,  Jehovah has chosen thee to be a people for his own possession, above all peoples that are upon the face of the earth.
Deut. Thou shall not eat any abominable thing.
Deut. These are the beasts which ye may eat: the ox, the sheep,  the goat,
Deut. the hart,  the gazelle,  the roebuck,  the wild goat,  the ibex,  the antelope,  the chamois.
Deut. And every beast that parts the hoof,  has the hoof cloven in two,  chews the cud, among the beasts, that may ye eat.
Deut. Nevertheless of those that chew the cud, or of those that have the hoof cloven, these ye shall not eat: the camel,  the hare,  the coney, because they chew the cud but do not part the hoof, they are unclean to you,
Deut. and the swine, because he parts the hoof but does not chew the cud, he is unclean to you. Of their flesh ye shall not eat,  their carcasses ye shall not touch.
Deut. These ye may eat of all that are in the waters: whatever has fins and scales ye may eat.
Deut. And whatever does not have fins and scales ye shall not eat; it is unclean to you.
Deut. Of all clean birds ye may eat,
Deut. but these are those of which ye shall not eat: the eagle,  the ossifrage,  the osprey,
Deut. and the glede,  the falcon,  the kite according to its kind,
Deut. and every raven after its kind,
Deut. and the ostrich,  the night-hawk,  the sea-gull,  the hawk according to its kind,
Deut. the little owl,  the great owl,  the horned owl,
Deut. and the pelican,  the vulture,  the cormorant,
Deut. and the stork,  the heron according to its kind,  the hoopoe,  the bat.
Deut. And all winged creeping things are unclean to you. They shall not be eaten.
Deut. Of all clean birds ye may eat.
Deut. Ye shall not eat of anything that dies of itself. Thou may give it to the sojourner who is within thy gates, that he may eat it, or thou may sell it to a foreigner, for thou are a holy people to Jehovah thy God. Thou shall not boil a kid in its mother's milk.
Deut. Thou shall surely tithe all the increase of thy seed; that which comes forth from the field year by year.
Deut. And thou shall eat before Jehovah thy God, in the place which he shall choose to cause his name to dwell there, the tithe of thy grain, of thy new wine,  of thine oil,  the firstlings of thy herd and of thy flock, that thou may learn to fear Jehovah thy God always.
Deut. And if the way is too long for thee, so that thou are not able to carry it, because the place is too far from thee, which Jehovah thy God shall choose to set his name there when Jehovah thy God shall bless thee,
Deut. then thou shall turn it into money,  bind up the money in thy hand,  shall go to the place which Jehovah thy God shall choose.
Deut. And thou shall bestow the money for whatever thy soul desires, for oxen, or for sheep, or for wine, or for strong drink, or for whatever thy soul asks of thee. And thou shall eat there before Jehovah thy God,  thou shall rejoice, thou and thy household.
Deut. And the Levite who is within thy gates, thou shall not forsake him, for he has no portion nor inheritance with thee.
Deut. At the end of every three years thou shall bring forth all the tithe of thine increase in the same year,  shall lay it up within thy gates.
Deut. And the Levite, because he has no portion nor inheritance with thee,  the sojourner,  the fatherless,  the widow, who are within thy gates, shall come,  shall eat and be satisfied, that Jehovah thy God may bless thee in all the work of thy hand which thou do.
Deut. At the end of every seven years thou shall make a release.
Deut. And this is the manner of the release: Every creditor shall release that which he has lent to his neighbor. He shall not exact it from his neighbor and his brother, because Jehovah's release has been proclaimed.
Deut. From a foreigner thou may exact it,  whatever of thine is with thy brother, thy hand shall release.
Deut. However there shall be no poor with thee (for Jehovah will surely bless thee in the land which Jehovah thy God gives thee for an inheritance to possess it),
Deut. if only thou diligently hearken to the voice of Jehovah thy God, to observe to do all this commandment which I command thee this day.
Deut. For Jehovah thy God will bless thee as he promised thee,  thou shall lend to many nations,  thou shall not borrow,  thou shall rule over many nations,  they shall not rule over thee.
Deut. If there be with thee a poor man, one of thy brothers, within any of thy gates in thy land which Jehovah thy God gives thee, thou shall not harden thy heart, nor shut thy hand from thy poor brother,
Deut. but thou shall surely open thy hand to him,  shall surely lend him sufficient for his need which he wants.
Deut. Beware that there not be a base thought in thy heart, saying, The seventh year, the year of release, is at hand,  thine eye be evil against thy poor brother,  thou give him nothing,  he cry to Jehovah against thee,  it be sin to thee.
Deut. Thou shall surely give him,  thy heart shall not be grieved when thou give to him, because for this thing Jehovah thy God will bless thee in all thy work,  in all that thou put thy hand to.
Deut. For the poor will never cease out of the land. Therefore I command thee, saying, Thou shall surely open thy hand to thy brother, to thy needy,  to thy poor, in thy land.
Deut. If thy brother, a Hebrew man, or a Hebrew woman, is sold to thee,  serves thee six years, then in the seventh year thou shall let him go free from thee.
Deut. And when thou let him go free from thee, thou shall not let him go empty.
Deut. Thou shall furnish him liberally out of thy flock,  out of thy threshing-floor,  out of thy winepress. As Jehovah thy God has blessed thee thou shall give to him.
Deut. And thou shall remember that thou were a bondman in the land of Egypt,  Jehovah thy God redeemed thee. Therefore I command thee this thing today.
Deut. And it shall be, if he says to thee, I will not go out from thee, because he loves thee and thy house, because he is well with thee,
Deut. then thou shall take an awl,  thrust it through his ear to the door,  he shall be thy servant forever. And also to thy maid-servant thou shall do likewise.
Deut. It shall not seem hard to thee when thou let him go free from thee, for he has been worth a double hired servant to thee, in serving thee six years. And Jehovah thy God will bless thee in all that thou do.
Deut. All the firstling males that are born of thy herd and of thy flock thou shall sanctify to Jehovah thy God. Thou shall do no work with the firstling of thy herd, nor shear the firstling of thy flock.
Deut. Thou shall eat it before Jehovah thy God year by year in the place which Jehovah shall choose, thou and thy household.
Deut. And if it has any blemish, as lame or blind, any ill blemish whatever, thou shall not sacrifice it to Jehovah thy God.
Deut. Thou shall eat it within thy gates. The unclean man and the clean man alike, as the gazelle,  as the hart.
Deut. Only thou shall not eat the blood of it. Thou shall pour it out upon the ground as water.
Deut. Observe the month of Abib,  keep the Passover to Jehovah thy God, for in the month of Abib Jehovah thy God brought thee forth out of Egypt by night.
Deut. And thou shall sacrifice the Passover to Jehovah thy God, of the flock and the herd, in the place which Jehovah shall choose to cause his name to dwell there.
Deut. Thou shall eat no leavened bread with it. Seven days thou shall eat unleavened bread with it, even the bread of affliction, for thou came forth out of the land of Egypt in haste, that thou may remember the day when thou came forth out of the land of Egypt all the days of thy life.
Deut. And there shall be no leaven seen with thee in all thy borders seven days. Neither shall any of the flesh, which thou sacrifice the first day at evening, remain all night until the morning.
Deut. Thou may not sacrifice the Passover within any of thy gates, which Jehovah thy God gives thee,
Deut. but at the place which Jehovah thy God shall choose to cause his name to dwell in, there thou shall sacrifice the Passover at evening, at the going down of the sun, at the season that thou came forth out of Egypt.
Deut. And thou shall roast and eat it in the place which Jehovah thy God shall choose,  thou shall turn in the morning,  go to thy tents.
Deut. Six days thou shall eat unleavened bread,  on the seventh day shall be a solemn assembly to Jehovah thy God. Thou shall do no work.
Deut. Thou shall number to thee seven weeks. From the time thou begin to put the sickle to the standing grain thou shall begin to number seven weeks.
Deut. And thou shall keep the feast of weeks to Jehovah thy God with a tribute of a freewill offering from thy hand, which thou shall give, according as Jehovah thy God blesses thee.
Deut. And thou shall rejoice before Jehovah thy God, thou,  thy son,  thy daughter,  thy man-servant,  thy maid-servant,  the Levite who is within thy gates,  the sojourner,  the fatherless,  the widow, who are in the midst of thee, in the place which Jehovah thy God shall choose to cause his name to dwell there,
Deut. and thou shall remember that thou were a bondman in Egypt. And thou shall observe and do these statutes.
Deut. Thou shall keep the feast of tabernacles seven days after thou have gathered in from thy threshing-floor and from thy winepress.
Deut. And thou shall rejoice in thy feast, thou,  thy son,  thy daughter,  thy man-servant,  thy maid-servant,  the Levite,  the sojourner,  the fatherless,  the widow, who are within thy gates.
Deut. Seven days thou shall keep a feast to Jehovah thy God in the place which Jehovah shall choose, because Jehovah thy God will bless thee in all thine increase,  in all the work of thy hands,  thou shall be altogether joyful.
Deut. Three times in a year all thy males shall appear before Jehovah thy God in the place which he shall choose: in the feast of unleavened bread,  in the feast of weeks,  in the feast of tabernacles. And they shall not appear before Jehovah empty.
Deut. Every man shall give as he is able, according to the blessing of Jehovah thy God which he has given thee.
Deut. Thou shall make judges and officers for thee in all thy gates, which Jehovah thy God gives thee, according to thy tribes,  they shall judge the people with righteous judgment.
Deut. Thou shall not distort justice. Thou shall not respect persons, neither shall thou take a bribe, for a bribe blinds the eyes of the wise,  perverts the words of the righteous.
Deut. Thou shall follow that which is altogether just, that thou may live,  inherit the land which Jehovah thy God gives thee.
Deut. Thou shall not plant for thee an Asherah of any kind of tree beside the altar of Jehovah thy God, which thou shall make for thee.
Deut. Neither shall thou set up a pillar for thee, which Jehovah thy God hates.
Deut. Thou shall not sacrifice to Jehovah thy God an ox, or a sheep, in which is a blemish or anything bad, for that is an abomination to Jehovah thy God.
Deut. If there be found in the midst of thee, within any of thy gates which Jehovah thy God gives thee, man or woman, who does that which is evil in the sight of Jehovah thy God, in transgressing his covenant,
Deut. and has gone and served other gods,  worshiped them, or the sun, or the moon, or any of the host of heaven, which I have not commanded,
Deut. and it be told thee,  thou have heard of it, then shall thou inquire diligently. And, behold, if it be true,  the thing certain, that such abomination is wrought in Israel,
Deut. then thou shall bring forth that man or that woman, who has done this evil thing, to thy gates, even the man or the woman,  thou shall stone them to death with stones.
Deut. At the mouth of two witnesses, or three witnesses, shall he who is to die be put to death. He shall not be put to death at the mouth of one witness.
Deut. The hand of the witnesses shall be first upon him to put him to death,  afterward the hand of all the people. So thou shall put away the evil from the midst of thee.
Deut. If there arise a matter too hard for thee in judgment, between blood and blood, between plea and plea,  between stroke and stroke, being matters of controversy within thy gates, then thou shall arise,  get thee up to the place which Jehovah thy God shall choose.
Deut. And thou shall come to the priests the Levites,  to the judge who shall be in those days,  thou shall inquire. And they shall show thee the sentence of judgment.
Deut. And thou shall do according to the tenor of the sentence which they shall show thee from that place which Jehovah shall choose. And thou shall observe to do according to all that they shall teach thee,
Deut. according to the tenor of the law which they shall teach thee,  according to the judgment which they shall tell thee, thou shall do. Thou shall not turn aside from the sentence, which they shall show thee, to the right hand, nor to the left.
Deut. And the man who does presumptuously, in not hearkening to the priest who stands to minister there before Jehovah thy God, or to the judge, even that man shall die,  thou shall put away the evil from Israel.
Deut. And all the people shall hear,  fear,  do no more presumptuously.
Deut. When thou have come to the land which Jehovah thy God gives thee,  shall possess it,  shall dwell in it,  shall say, I will set a king over me like all the nations that are round about me,
Deut. thou shall surely set him king over thee whom Jehovah thy God shall choose. Thou shall set a king over thee from among thy brothers. Thou may not put a foreigner over thee who is not thy brother.
Deut. Only he shall not multiply horses to himself, nor cause the people to return to Egypt, to the end that he may multiply horses, inasmuch as Jehovah has said to you, Ye shall henceforth return no more that way.
Deut. Neither shall he multiply wives to himself, that his heart turn not away. Neither shall he greatly multiply to himself silver and gold.
Deut. And it shall be, when he sits upon the throne of his kingdom, that he shall write for him a copy of this law in a book, out of it before the priests the Levites,
Deut. and it shall be with him. And he shall read in it all the days of his life, that he may learn to fear Jehovah his God, to keep all the words of this law and these statutes, to do them,
Deut. that his heart not be lifted up above his brothers,  that he turn not aside from the commandment, to the right hand, or to the left, to the end that he may prolong his days in his kingdom, he and his sons, in the midst of Israel.
Deut. The priests the Levites, even all the tribe of Levi, shall have no portion nor inheritance with Israel. They shall eat the offerings of Jehovah made by fire,  his inheritance.
Deut. And they shall have no inheritance among their brothers. Jehovah is their inheritance as he has spoken to them.
Deut. And this shall be the priests' due from the people, from those who offer a sacrifice, whether it be ox or sheep: that they shall give to the priest the shoulder,  the two cheeks,  the maw.
Deut. The first-fruits of thy grain, of thy new wine,  of thine oil,  the first of the fleece of thy sheep, thou shall give him.
Deut. For Jehovah thy God has chosen him out of all thy tribes to stand to minister in the name of Jehovah, him and his sons forever.
Deut. And if a Levite comes from any of thy gates out of all Israel, where he sojourns,  comes with all the desire of his soul to the place which Jehovah shall choose,
Deut. then he shall minister in the name of Jehovah his God, as all his brothers the Levites do who stand there before Jehovah.
Deut. They shall have like portions to eat, besides that which comes of the sale of his patrimony.
Deut. When thou have come into the land, which Jehovah thy God gives thee, thou shall not learn to do according to the abominations of those nations.
Deut. There shall not be found with thee anyone who makes his son or his daughter to pass through the fire, a psychic, he who practices augury, or an enchanter, or a sorcerer,
Deut. or a charmer, or a medium, or a spiritist, or a necromancer.
Deut. For whoever does these things is an abomination to Jehovah. And because of these abominations Jehovah thy God drives them out from before thee.
Deut. Thou shall be perfect with Jehovah thy God.
Deut. For these nations, that thou shall dispossess, hearken to those who practice augury,  to psychics. But as for thee, Jehovah thy God has not allowed thee to do so.
Deut. Jehovah thy God will raise up for thee a prophet from the midst of thee, of thy brothers, like me. Ye shall hearken to him,
Deut. according to all that thou desired of Jehovah thy God in Horeb in the day of the assembly, saying, Let me not hear again the voice of Jehovah my God, neither let me see this great fire any more, that I not die.
Deut. And Jehovah said to me, They have well said that which they have spoken.
Deut. I will raise up a prophet for them from among their brothers, like thee. And I will put my words in his mouth,  he shall speak to them all that I shall command him.
Deut. And it shall come to pass, that whoever will not hearken to my words which he shall speak in my name, I will require it of him.
Deut. But the prophet, who shall speak a word presumptuously in my name, which I have not commanded him to speak, or who shall speak in the name of other gods, that same prophet shall die.
Deut. And if thou say in thy heart, How shall we know the word which Jehovah has not spoken?
Deut. When a prophet speaks in the name of Jehovah, if the thing does not follow, nor come to pass, that is the thing which Jehovah has not spoken. The prophet has spoken it presumptuously. Thou shall not be afraid of him.
Deut. When Jehovah thy God shall cut off the nations, whose land Jehovah thy God gives thee,  thou succeed them,  dwell in their cities,  in their houses,
Deut. thou shall set apart three cities for thee in the midst of thy land, which Jehovah thy God gives thee to possess it.
Deut. Thou shall prepare for thee the way,  divide the borders of thy land, which Jehovah thy God causes thee to inherit, into three parts, that every manslayer may flee there.
Deut. And this is the case of the manslayer, who shall flee there and live: Whoever kills his neighbor unawares,  did not hate him in time past,
Deut. as when a man goes into the forest with his neighbor to hew wood,  his hand fetches a stroke with the axe to cut down the tree,  the head slips from the helve,  lands upon his neighbor, so that he dies, he shall flee to one of these cities and live.
Deut. Lest the avenger of blood pursue the manslayer, while his heart is hot,  overtake him, because the way is long,  smite him mortally, whereas he was not worthy of death, inasmuch as he did not hate him in time past.
Deut. Therefore I command thee, saying, Thou shall set apart three cities for thee.
Deut. And if Jehovah thy God enlarge thy border, as he has sworn to thy fathers,  give thee all the land which he promised to give to thy fathers,
Deut. if thou shall keep all this commandment to do it, which I command thee this day, to love Jehovah thy God,  to walk ever in his ways, then shall thou add three more cities for thee, besides these three,
Deut. that innocent blood not be shed in the midst of thy land, which Jehovah thy God gives thee for an inheritance,  so blood be upon thee.
Deut. But if any man hates his neighbor,  lies in wait for him,  rises up against him,  smites him mortally so that he dies,  he flees into one of these cities,
Deut. then the elders of his city shall send and fetch him from there,  deliver him into the hand of the avenger of blood, that he may die.
Deut. Thine eye shall not pity him,  thou shall put away the innocent blood from Israel, that it may go well with thee.
Deut. Thou shall not remove thy neighbor's landmark, which they of old time have set, in thine inheritance which thou shall inherit, in the land that Jehovah thy God gives thee to possess it.
Deut. One witness shall not rise up against a man for any iniquity, or for any sin, in any sin that he sins. At the mouth of two witnesses, or at the mouth of three witnesses, shall a matter be established.
Deut. If an unrighteous witness rises up against any man to testify against him of wrong-doing,
Deut. then both the men, between whom the controversy is, shall stand before Jehovah, before the priests and the judges that shall be in those days,
Deut. and the judges shall make diligent inquiry. And, behold, if the witness is a false witness,  has testified falsely against his brother,
Deut. then ye shall do to him, as he had thought to do to his brother. So shall thou put away the evil from the midst of thee.
Deut. And those who remain shall hear,  fear,  shall henceforth commit no more any such evil in the midst of thee.
Deut. And thine eyes shall not pity: life for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot.
Deut. When thou go forth to battle against thine enemies,  see horses,  chariots,  a people more than thou, thou shall not be afraid of them, for Jehovah thy God is with thee, who brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.
Deut. And it shall be, when ye draw near to the battle, that the priest shall approach and speak to the people,
Deut. and shall say to them, Hear, O Israel, ye draw near this day to battle against your enemies. Let not your heart faint. Fear not, nor tremble, neither be ye frightened at them.
Deut. For Jehovah your God is he who goes with you, to fight for you against your enemies, to save you.
Deut. And the officers shall speak to the people, saying, What man is there who has built a new house,  has not dedicated it? Let him go and return to his house, lest he die in the battle,  another man dedicate it.
Deut. And what man is there who has planted a vineyard,  has not used the fruit of it? Let him go and return to his house, lest he die in the battle,  another man use the fruit of it.
Deut. And what man is there who has betrothed a wife,  has not taken her? Let him go and return to his house, lest he die in the battle,  another man take her.
Deut. And the officers shall speak further to the people,  they shall say, What man is there who is fearful and faint-hearted? Let him go and return to his house, lest his brother's heart melt as his heart.
Deut. And it shall be, when the officers have made an end of speaking to the people, that they shall appoint captains of armies at the head of the people.
Deut. When thou draw near to a city to fight against it, then proclaim peace to it.
Deut. And it shall be, if it makes to thee an answer of peace,  opens to thee, then it shall be, that all the people that are found in it shall become tributary to thee,  shall serve thee.
Deut. And if it will make no peace with thee,  will make war against thee, then thou shall besiege it.
Deut. And when Jehovah thy God delivers it into thy hand, thou shall smite every male of it with the edge of the sword,
Deut. but the women,  the little ones,  the cattle,  all that is in the city, even all the spoil of it, thou shall take for a prey to thyself. And thou shall eat the spoil of thine enemies, which Jehovah thy God has given thee.
Deut. Thus thou shall do to all the cities which are very far off from thee, which are not of the cities of these nations.
Deut. But of the cities of these peoples, that Jehovah thy God gives thee for an inheritance, thou shall save alive nothing that breathes,
Deut. but thou shall utterly destroy them-the Hittite,  the Amorite, the Canaanite,  the Perizzite, the Hivite,  the Jebusite-as Jehovah thy God has commanded thee,
Deut. that they not teach you to do after all their abominations, which they have done to their gods, so ye would sin against Jehovah your God.
Deut. When thou shall besiege a city a long time, in making war against it to take it, thou shall not destroy the trees of it by wielding an axe against them, for thou may eat of them. And thou shall not cut them down, for is the tree of the field a man, that it should be besieged by thee?
Deut. Only the trees of which thou know that they are not trees for food, thou shall destroy and cut them down. And thou shall build bulwarks against the city that makes war with thee, until it falls.
Deut. If a man is found slain in the land which Jehovah thy God gives thee to possess it, lying in the field,  it not be known who has smitten him,
Deut. then thy elders and thy judges shall come forth. And they shall measure to the cities which are round about him who is slain,
Deut. and it shall be, that the city which is nearest to the slain man, even the elders of that city shall take a heifer of the herd, which has not been worked with,  which has not drawn in the yoke,
Deut. and the elders of that city shall bring down the heifer to a valley with running water, which is neither plowed nor sown,  shall break the heifer's neck there in the valley.
Deut. And the priests the sons of Levi shall come near, for Jehovah thy God has chosen them to minister to him,  to bless in the name of Jehovah,  according to their word shall every controversy and every stroke be.
Deut. And all the elders of that city, who are nearest to the slain man, shall wash their hands over the heifer whose neck was broken in the valley,
Deut. and they shall answer and say, Our hands have not shed this blood, neither have our eyes seen it.
Deut. Forgive, O Jehovah, thy people Israel whom thou have redeemed,  allow no innocent blood to remain in the midst of thy people Israel. And the blood shall be forgiven them.
Deut. So shall thou put away the innocent blood from the midst of thee when thou shall do that which is right in the eyes of Jehovah.
Deut. When thou go forth to battle against thine enemies,  Jehovah thy God delivers them into thy hands,  thou carry them away captive,
Deut. and see among the captives a beautiful woman,  thou have a desire for her,  would take her to thee to wife,
Deut. then thou shall bring her home to thy house. And she shall shave her head,  pare her nails,
Deut. and she shall put the raiment of her captivity from off her,  shall remain in thy house,  bewail her father and her mother a full month. And after that thou shall go in to her,  be her husband,  she shall be thy wife.
Deut. And it shall be, if thou have no delight in her, then thou shall let her go where she will,  thou shall not sell her at all for money. Thou shall not deal with her harshly, because thou have humbled her.
Deut. If a man has two wives, the one beloved,  the other regarded inferior,  they have borne him sons, both the beloved and the one regarded inferior,  if the firstborn son be hers who was regarded inferior,
Deut. then it shall be, in the day that he causes his sons to inherit that which he has, that he may not make the son of the beloved the firstborn before the son of the one regarded inferior, who is the firstborn.
Deut. But he shall acknowledge the firstborn, the son of the one regarded inferior, by giving him a double portion of all that he has, for he is the beginning of his strength. The right of the firstborn is his.
Deut. If a man has a stubborn and rebellious son, who will not obey the voice of his father, or the voice of his mother, , though they chasten him, will not hearken to them,
Deut. then his father and his mother shall lay hold on him,  bring him out to the elders of his city,  to the gate of his place.
Deut. And they shall say to the elders of his city, This our son is stubborn and rebellious, he will not obey our voice. He is a glutton,  a drunkard.
Deut. And all the men of his city shall stone him to death with stones. So thou shall put away the evil from the midst of thee,  all Israel shall hear,  fear.
Deut. And if a man has committed a sin worthy of death,  he be put to death,  thou hang him on a tree,
Deut. his body shall not remain all night upon the tree,  thou shall surely bury him the same day, for he who is hanged is accursed of God, that thou not defile thy land which Jehovah thy God gives thee for an inheritance.
Deut. Thou shall not see thy brother's ox or his sheep go astray,  hide thyself from them. Thou shall surely bring them again to thy brother.
Deut. And if thy brother be not near to thee, or if thou do not know him, then thou shall bring it home to thy house,  it shall be with thee until thy brother seeks after it,  thou shall restore it to him.
Deut. And so shall thou do with his donkey,  so shall thou do with his garment,  so shall thou do with every lost thing of thy brother's, which he has lost,  thou have found. Thou may not hide thyself.
Deut. Thou shall not see thy brother's donkey or his ox fallen down by the way,  hide thyself from them. Thou shall surely help him to lift them up again.
Deut. A woman shall not wear that which pertains to a man, neither shall a man put on a woman's garment, for whoever does these things is an abomination to Jehovah thy God.
Deut. If a bird's nest chance to be before thee in the way, in any tree or on the ground, with young ones or eggs,  the dam sitting upon the young or upon the eggs, thou shall not take the dam with the young.
Deut. Thou shall surely let the dam go,  the young thou may take to thyself, that it may be well with thee,  that thou may prolong thy days.
Deut. When thou build a new house, then thou shall make a guard rail for thy roof, that thou not bring blood upon thy house, if any man falls from there.
Deut. Thou shall not sow thy vineyard with two kinds of seed, lest the whole fruit be forfeited: the seed which thou have sown,  the increase of the vineyard.
Deut. Thou shall not plow with an ox and a donkey together.
Deut. Thou shall not wear a mingled stuff, wool and linen together.
Deut. Thou shall make for thee hems upon the four borders of thy clothing, with which thou cover thyself.
Deut. If any man takes a wife,  goes in to her,  dislikes her,
Deut. and charges her with shameful things,  brings up an evil name upon her,  says, I took this woman,  when I came near to her, I did not find in her the tokens of virginity,
Deut. then the father of the damsel,  her mother, shall take and bring forth the tokens of the damsel's virginity to the elders of the city in the gate.
Deut. And the damsel's father shall say to the elders, I gave my daughter to this man to wife,  he dislikes her.
Deut. And, lo, he has charged her with shameful things, saying, I did not find in thy daughter the tokens of virginity,  yet these are the tokens of my daughter's virginity. And they shall spread the garment before the elders of the city.
Deut. And the elders of that city shall take the man and chastise him,
Deut. and they shall fine him a hundred shekels of silver,  give them to the father of the damsel, because he has brought up an evil name upon a virgin of Israel,  she shall be his wife. He may not put her away all his days.
Deut. But if this thing be true, that the tokens of virginity were not found in the damsel,
Deut. then they shall bring the damsel out to the door of her father's house,  the men of her city shall stone her to death with stones, because she has wrought folly in Israel, to play the harlot in her father's house. So shall thou put away the evil from the midst of thee.
Deut. If a man be found lying with a woman married to a husband, then they shall both of them die, the man that lay with the woman,  the woman. So shall thou put away the evil from Israel.
Deut. If there be a damsel who is a virgin betrothed to a husband,  a man finds her in the city,  lies with her,
Deut. then ye shall bring them both out to the gate of that city. And ye shall stone them to death with stones, the damsel, because she did not cry out, being in the city,  the man, because he has humbled his neighbor's wife. So thou shall put away the evil from the midst of thee.
Deut. But if the man finds the damsel who is betrothed in the field,  the man forces her,  lies with her, then only the man who lay with her shall die,
Deut. but to the damsel thou shall do nothing. There is in the damsel no sin worthy of death. For as when a man rises against his neighbor,  kills him, even so is this matter,
Deut. for he found her in the field, the betrothed damsel cried out,  there was none to save her.
Deut. If a man finds a damsel who is a virgin, who is not betrothed,  lays hold on her,  lies with her,  they be found,
Deut. then the man who lay with her shall give to the damsel's father fifty shekels of silver,  she shall be his wife, because he has humbled her. He may not put her away all his days.
Deut. A man shall not take his father's wife,  shall not uncover his father's skirt.
Deut. He who is wounded in the testicles, or has his private part cut off, shall not enter into the assembly of Jehovah.
Deut. A bastard shall not enter into the assembly of Jehovah, even to the tenth generation none of his shall enter into the assembly of Jehovah.
Deut. An Ammonite or a Moabite shall not enter into the assembly of Jehovah, even to the tenth generation none belonging to them shall enter into the assembly of Jehovah forever,
Deut. because they met you not with bread and with water on the way, when ye came forth out of Egypt,  because they hired against thee Balaam the son of Beor from Pethor of Mesopotamia, to curse thee.
Deut. Nevertheless Jehovah thy God would not hearken to Balaam,  Jehovah thy God turned the curse into a blessing to thee, because Jehovah thy God loved thee.
Deut. Thou shall not seek their peace nor their prosperity all thy days forever.
Deut. Thou shall not abhor an Edomite, for he is thy brother. Thou shall not abhor an Egyptian, because thou were a sojourner in his land.
Deut. The sons of the third generation who are born to them shall enter into the assembly of Jehovah.
Deut. When the army goes forth against thine enemies, then thou shall keep thee from every evil thing.
Deut. If there be among you any man, who is not clean by reason of an accident by night, then he shall go abroad out of the camp. He shall not come inside the camp.
Deut. But it shall be, when evening comes on, he shall bathe himself in water,  when the sun is down, he shall come inside the camp.
Deut. Thou shall have a place also outside the camp, where thou shall go forth abroad.
Deut. And thou shall have a paddle among thy weapons,  it shall be, when thou sit down abroad, thou shall dig with it,  shall turn back and cover that which comes from thee.
Deut. For Jehovah thy God walks in the midst of thy camp, to deliver thee,  to give up thine enemies before thee. Therefore thy camp shall be holy, that he may not see an unclean thing in thee,  turn away from thee.
Deut. Thou shall not deliver to his master a servant who is escaped from his master to thee.
Deut. He shall dwell with thee, in the midst of thee, in the place which he shall choose within one of thy gates, where it pleases him best. Thou shall not oppress him.
Deut. There shall be no prostitute of the daughters of Israel, neither shall there be a sodomite of the sons of Israel.
Deut. Thou shall not bring the hire of a harlot, or the wages of a dog, into the house of Jehovah thy God for any vow, for even both these are an abomination to Jehovah thy God.
Deut. Thou shall not lend upon interest to thy brother: interest of money, interest of food, interest of anything that is lent upon interest.
Deut. To a foreigner thou may lend upon interest,  to thy brother thou shall not lend upon interest, that Jehovah thy God may bless thee in all that thou put thy hand to, in the land where thou go in to possess it.
Deut. When thou shall vow a vow to Jehovah thy God, thou shall not be slack to pay it. For Jehovah thy God will surely require it of thee,  it would be sin in thee.
Deut. But if thou shall forbear to vow, it shall be no sin in thee.
Deut. That which has gone out of thy lips thou shall observe and do, according as thou have vowed to Jehovah thy God, a freewill offering, which thou have promised with thy mouth.
Deut. When thou come into thy neighbor's vineyard, then thou may eat thy fill of grapes at thine own pleasure,  thou shall not put any in thy vessel.
Deut. When thou come into thy neighbor's standing grain, then thou may pluck the ears with thy hand,  thou shall not move a sickle to thy neighbor's standing grain.
Deut. When a man takes a wife,  marries her, then it shall be, if she finds no favor in his eyes, because he has found some unseemly thing in her, that he shall write her a bill of divorcement,  give it in her hand,  send her out of his house.
Deut. And when she has departed out of his house, she may go and be another man's.
Deut. And if the latter husband dislikes her,  writes her a bill of divorcement,  gives it in her hand,  sends her out of his house, or if the latter husband dies, who took her to be his wife,
Deut. her former husband, who sent her away, may not take her again to be his wife after she is defiled. For that is abomination before Jehovah,  thou shall not cause the land to sin, which Jehovah thy God gives thee for an inheritance.
Deut. When a man takes a new wife, he shall not go out in the army, neither shall he be charged with any business. He shall be free at home one year,  shall cheer his wife whom he has taken.
Deut. No man shall take the mill or the upper millstone to pledge, for he takes life to pledge.
Deut. If a man is found stealing any of his brothers of the sons of Israel,  he deals with him harshly, or sells him, then that thief shall die. So shall thou put away the evil from the midst of thee.
Deut. Take heed in the disease of leprosy, that thou observe diligently,  do according to all that the priests the Levites shall teach you. As I commanded them, so ye shall observe to do.
Deut. Remember what Jehovah thy God did to Miriam by the way as ye came forth out of Egypt.
Deut. When thou do lend thy neighbor any manner of loan, thou shall not go into his house to fetch his pledge.
Deut. Thou shall stand outside,  the man to whom thou lend shall bring forth the pledge outside to thee.
Deut. And if he is a poor man, thou shall not sleep with his pledge.
Deut. Thou shall surely restore to him the pledge when the sun goes down, that he may sleep in his garment,  bless thee. And it shall be righteousness to thee before Jehovah thy God.
Deut. Thou shall not oppress a hired servant who is poor and needy, whether he be of thy brothers, or of thy sojourners that are in thy land within thy gates.
Deut. Thou shall give him his hire in his day, neither shall the sun go down upon it, for he is poor,  sets his heart upon it, lest he cry against thee to Jehovah,  it be sin to thee.
Deut. The fathers shall not be put to death for the sons, neither shall the sons be put to death for the fathers. Every man shall be put to death for his own sin.
Deut. Thou shall not distort the justice due to the sojourner, or to the fatherless, nor take the widow's raiment to pledge,
Deut. but thou shall remember that thou were a bondman in Egypt,  Jehovah thy God redeemed thee from there. Therefore I command thee to do this thing.
Deut. When thou reap thy harvest in thy field,  have forgotten a sheaf in the field, thou shall not go again to fetch it. It shall be for the sojourner, for the fatherless,  for the widow, that Jehovah thy God may bless thee in all the work of thy hands.
Deut. When thou beat thine olive tree, thou shall not go over the boughs again. It shall be for the sojourner, for the fatherless,  for the widow.
Deut. When thou gather of thy vineyard, thou shall not glean it behind thee. It shall be for the sojourner, for the fatherless,  for the widow.
Deut. And thou shall remember that thou were a bondman in the land of Egypt. Therefore I command thee to do this thing.
Deut. If there be a controversy between men,  they come to judgment,  they judge them, then they shall justify the righteous,  condemn the iniquitous.
Deut. And it shall be, if the iniquitous man is deserving to be beaten, that the judge shall cause him to lie down,  to be beaten before his face, according to his iniquity, by number.
Deut. He may give him forty stripes. He shall not exceed, lest, if he should exceed,  beat him above these with many stripes, then thy brother should seem debased to thee.
Deut. Thou shall not muzzle the ox when he treads out the grain.
Deut. If brothers dwell together,  one of them dies,  has no son, the wife of the dead man shall not be married outside to a stranger. Her husband's brother shall go in to her,  take her to him to wife,  perform the duty of a husband's brother to her.
Deut. And it shall be, that the firstborn who she bears shall succeed in the name of his brother who is dead, that his name be not blotted out of Israel.
Deut. And if the man does not want to take his brother's wife, then his brother's wife shall go up to the gate to the elders,  say, My husband's brother refuses to raise up to his brother a name in Israel. He will not perform the duty of a husband's brother to me.
Deut. Then the elders of his city shall call him,  speak to him. And if he stands,  says, I do not want to take her,
Deut. then his brother's wife shall come to him in the presence of the elders,  loose his shoe from off his foot,  spit in his face. And she shall answer and say, So shall it be done to the man who does not build up his brother's house.
Deut. And his name shall be called in Israel, The house of him who has his shoe loosed.
Deut. When men strive together one with another,  the wife of the one draws near to deliver her husband out of the hand of him who smites him,  puts forth her hand,  takes him by the privates,
Deut. then thou shall cut off her hand. Thine eye shall have no pity.
Deut. Thou shall not have in thy bag diverse weights, a great and a small.
Deut. Thou shall not have in thy house diverse measures, a great and a small.
Deut. A perfect and just weight thou shall have, a perfect and just measure thou shall have, that thy days may be long in the land which Jehovah thy God gives thee.
Deut. For all who do such things, even all who do unrighteously, are an abomination to Jehovah thy God.
Deut. Remember what Amalek did to thee by the way as ye came forth out of Egypt,
Deut. how he met thee by the way,  smote the hindmost of thee, all who were feeble behind thee, when thou were faint and weary,  he feared not God.
Deut. Therefore it shall be, when Jehovah thy God has given thee rest from all thine enemies round about, in the land which Jehovah thy God gives thee for an inheritance to possess it, that thou shall blot out the remembrance of Amalek from under heaven. Thou shall not forget.
Deut. And it shall be, when thou have come in to the land which Jehovah thy God gives thee for an inheritance,  possess it,  dwell in it,
Deut. that thou shall take of the first of all the fruit of the ground, which thou shall bring in from thy land that Jehovah thy God gives thee,  thou shall put it in a basket,  shall go to the place which Jehovah thy God shall choose to cause his name to dwell there.
Deut. And thou shall come to the priest who shall be in those days,  say to him, I profess this day to Jehovah thy God, that I have come to the land which Jehovah swore to our fathers to give us.
Deut. And the priest shall take the basket out of thy hand,  set it down before the altar of Jehovah thy God.
Deut. And thou shall answer and say before Jehovah thy God, My father was a Syrian ready to perish,  he went down into Egypt,  sojourned there, few in number. And he became there a nation, great, mighty,  populous.
Deut. And the Egyptians dealt ill with us,  afflicted us,  laid upon us hard bondage.
Deut. And we cried to Jehovah, the God of our fathers,  Jehovah heard our voice,  saw our affliction,  our toil,  our oppression.
Deut. And Jehovah brought us forth out of Egypt with a mighty hand,  with an outstretched arm,  with great terribleness,  with signs,  with wonders.
Deut. And he has brought us into this place,  has given us this land, a land flowing with milk and honey.
Deut. And now, behold, I have brought the first of the fruit of the ground, which thou, O Jehovah, have given me. And thou shall set it down before Jehovah thy God,  worship before Jehovah thy God.
Deut. And thou shall rejoice in all the good which Jehovah thy God has given to thee,  to thy house, thou,  the Levite,  the sojourner who is in the midst of thee.
Deut. When thou have made an end of tithing all the tithe of thine increase in the third year, which is the year of tithing, then thou shall give it to the Levite, to the sojourner, to the fatherless,  to the widow, that they may eat within thy gates,  be filled.
Deut. And thou shall say before Jehovah thy God, I have put away the hallowed things out of my house,  also have given them to the Levite,  to the sojourner, to the fatherless,  to the widow, according to all thy commandment which thou have commanded me. I have not transgressed any of thy commandments, neither have I forgotten them.
Deut. I have not eaten of it in my mourning, neither have I put away from it, being unclean, nor given of it for the dead. I have hearkened to the voice of Jehovah my God. I have done according to all that thou have commanded me.
Deut. Look down from thy holy habitation, from heaven,  bless thy people Israel,  the ground which thou have given us, as thou swore to our fathers, a land flowing with milk and honey.
Deut. This day Jehovah thy God commands thee to do these statutes and ordinances. Thou shall therefore keep and do them with all thy heart,  with all thy soul.
Deut. Thou have avouched Jehovah this day to be thy God,  that thou would walk in his ways,  keep his statutes,  his commandments,  his ordinances,  hearken to his voice.
Deut. And Jehovah has avouched thee this day to be a people for his own possession, as he has promised thee,  that thou should keep all his commandments,
Deut. and to make thee high above all nations that he has made, in praise,  in name,  in honor,  that thou may be a holy people to Jehovah thy God, as he has spoken.
Deut. And Moses and the elders of Israel commanded the people, saying, Keep all the commandment which I command you this day.
Deut. And it shall be on the day when ye shall pass over the Jordan to the land which Jehovah thy God gives thee, that thou shall set up for thee great stones,  plaster them with plaster.
Deut. And thou shall write upon them all the words of this law when thou have passed over, that thou may go in to the land which Jehovah thy God gives thee, a land flowing with milk and honey, as Jehovah, the God of thy fathers, has promised thee.
Deut. And it shall be, when ye have passed over the Jordan, that ye shall set up these stones, which I command you this day, in mount Ebal,  thou shall plaster them with plaster.
Deut. And there thou shall build an altar to Jehovah thy God, an altar of stones. Thou shall lift up no iron upon them.
Deut. Thou shall build the altar of Jehovah thy God of unhewn stones. And thou shall offer burnt offerings on it to Jehovah thy God.
Deut. And thou shall sacrifice peace offerings,  shall eat there,  thou shall rejoice before Jehovah thy God.
Deut. And thou shall write upon the stones all the words of this law very plainly.
Deut. And Moses and the priests the Levites spoke to all Israel, saying, Keep silence,  hearken, O Israel. This day thou have become the people of Jehovah thy God.
Deut. Thou shall therefore obey the voice of Jehovah thy God,  do his commandments and his statutes, which I command thee this day.
Deut. And Moses charged the people the same day, saying,
Deut. These shall stand upon mount Gerizim to bless the people, when ye have passed over the Jordan: Simeon,  Levi,  Judah,  Issachar,  Joseph,  Benjamin.
Deut. And these shall stand upon mount Ebal for the curse: Reuben, Gad,  Asher,  Zebulun, Dan,  Naphtali.
Deut. And the Levites shall answer,  say to all the men of Israel with a loud voice,
Deut. Cursed be the man who makes a graven or molten image, an abomination to Jehovah, the work of the hands of the craftsman,  sets it up in secret. And all the people shall answer and say, Truly.
Deut. Cursed be he who dishonors his father or his mother. And all the people shall say, Truly.
Deut. Cursed be he who removes his neighbor's landmark. And all the people shall say, Truly.
Deut. Cursed be he who makes the blind to wander out of the way. And all the people shall say, Truly.
Deut. Cursed be he who distorts the justice to the sojourner, fatherless,  widow. And all the people shall say, Truly.
Deut. Cursed be he who lies with his father's wife, because he has uncovered his father's skirt. And all the people shall say, Truly.
Deut. Cursed be he who lies with any manner of beast. And all the people shall say, Truly.
Deut. Cursed be he who lies with his sister, the daughter of his father, or the daughter of his mother. And all the people shall say, Truly.
Deut. Cursed be he who lies with his mother-in-law. And all the people shall say, Truly.
Deut. Cursed be he who smites his neighbor in secret. And all the people shall say, Truly.
Deut. Cursed be he who takes a bribe to kill an innocent man. And all the people shall say, Truly.
Deut. Cursed is every man who does not continue in all the words of this law to do them. And all the people shall say, Truly.
Deut. And it shall come to pass, if thou shall hearken diligently to the voice of Jehovah thy God, to observe to do all his commandments which I command thee this day, that Jehovah thy God will set thee on high above all the nations of the earth,
Deut. and all these blessings shall come upon thee,  overtake thee, if thou shall hearken to the voice of Jehovah thy God:
Deut. Blessed shall thou be in the city,  blessed shall thou be in the field.
Deut. Blessed shall be the fruit of thy body,  the fruit of thy ground,  the fruit of thy beasts, the increase of thy cattle,  the young of thy flock.
Deut. Blessed shall be thy basket and thy kneading-trough.
Deut. Blessed shall thou be when thou come in,  blessed shall thou be when thou go out.
Deut. Jehovah will cause thine enemies that rise up against thee to be smitten before thee. They shall come out against thee one way,  shall flee before thee seven ways.
Deut. Jehovah will command the blessing upon thee in thy barns,  in all that thou put thy hand to. And he will bless thee in the land which Jehovah thy God gives thee.
Deut. Jehovah will establish thee for a holy people to himself, as he has sworn to thee, if thou shall keep the commandments of Jehovah thy God,  walk in his ways.
Deut. And all the peoples of the earth shall see that thou are called by the name of Jehovah,  they shall be afraid of thee.
Deut. And Jehovah will make thee plenteous for good, in the fruit of thy body,  in the fruit of thy cattle,  in the fruit of thy ground, in the land which Jehovah swore to thy fathers to give thee.
Deut. Jehovah will open to thee his good treasure the heavens, to give the rain of thy land in its season,  to bless all the work of thy hand. And thou shall lend to many nations,  thou shall not borrow.
Deut. And Jehovah will make thee the head,  not the tail. And thou shall only be above,  thou shall not be beneath, if thou shall hearken to the commandments of Jehovah thy God, which I command thee this day, to observe and to do,
Deut. and shall not turn aside from any of the words which I command you this day, to the right hand, or to the left, to go after other gods to serve them.
Deut. But it shall come to pass, if thou will not hearken to the voice of Jehovah thy God, to observe to do all his commandments and his statutes which I command thee this day, that all these curses shall come upon thee,  overtake thee:
Deut. Cursed shall thou be in the city,  cursed shall thou be in the field.
Deut. Cursed shall be thy basket and thy kneading-trough.
Deut. Cursed shall be the fruit of thy body,  the fruit of thy ground, the increase of thy cattle,  the young of thy flock.
Deut. Cursed shall thou be when thou come in,  cursed shall thou be when thou go out.
Deut. Jehovah will send upon thee cursing, discomfiture,  rebuke, in all that thou put thy hand to do, until thou be destroyed,  until thou perish quickly, because of the evil of thy doings, by which thou have forsaken me.
Deut. Jehovah will make the pestilence cling to thee, until he has consumed thee from off the land, where thou go in to possess it.
Deut. Jehovah will smite thee with consumption,  with fever,  with inflammation,  with fiery heat,  with the sword,  with blight,  with mildew. And they shall pursue thee until thou perish.
Deut. And thy sky that is over thy head shall be brass,  the earth that is under thee shall be iron.
Deut. Jehovah will make the rain of thy land powder and dust. From the sky it shall come down upon thee, until thou be destroyed.
Deut. Jehovah will cause thee to be smitten before thine enemies. Thou shall go out one way against them,  shall flee seven ways before them. And thou shall be tossed to and fro among all the kingdoms of the earth.
Deut. And thy dead body shall be food to all birds of the sky,  to the beasts of the earth,  there shall be none to frighten them away.
Deut. Jehovah will smite thee with the boil of Egypt,  with the emerods,  with the scurvy,  with the itch, of which thou cannot be healed.
Deut. Jehovah will smite thee with madness,  with blindness,  with confusion of mind,
Deut. and thou shall grope at noonday, as the blind man gropes in darkness. And thou shall not prosper in thy ways. And thou shall only be oppressed and robbed always,  there shall be none to save thee.
Deut. Thou shall betroth a wife,  another man shall lie with her. Thou shall build a house,  thou shall not dwell in it. Thou shall plant a vineyard,  shall not use the fruit of it.
Deut. Thine ox shall be slain before thine eyes,  thou shall not eat of it. Thy donkey shall be violently taken away from before thy face,  shall not be restored to thee. Thy sheep shall be given to thine enemies,  thou shall have none to save thee.
Deut. Thy sons and thy daughters shall be given to another people. And thine eyes shall look,  fail with longing for them all the day,  there shall be nothing in the power of thy hand.
Deut. The fruit of thy ground,  all thy labors, shall a nation eat up which thou know not. And thou shall only be oppressed and crushed always,
Deut. so that thou shall be mad because of the sight of thine eyes which thou shall see.
Deut. Jehovah will smite thee in the knees,  in the legs, with a sore boil, of which thou cannot be healed, from the sole of thy foot to the crown of thy head.
Deut. Jehovah will bring thee,  thy king whom thou shall set over thee, to a nation that thou have not known, thou nor thy fathers. And there thou shall serve other gods, wood and stone.
Deut. And thou shall become an astonishment, a proverb,  a byword, among all the peoples where Jehovah shall lead thee away.
Deut. Thou shall carry much seed out into the field,  shall gather little in, for the locust shall consume it.
Deut. Thou shall plant vineyards and dress them,  thou shall neither drink of the wine, nor gather, for the worm shall eat them.
Deut. Thou shall have olive trees throughout all thy borders,  thou shall not anoint thyself with the oil, for thine olive shall drop off.
Deut. Thou shall beget sons and daughters,  they shall not be thine, for they shall go into captivity.
Deut. All thy trees and the fruit of thy ground shall the locust possess.
Deut. The sojourner who is in the midst of thee shall mount up above thee higher and higher,  thou shall come down lower and lower.
Deut. He shall lend to thee,  thou shall not lend to him. He shall be the head,  thou shall be the tail.
Deut. And all these curses shall come upon thee,  shall pursue thee,  overtake thee, till thou be destroyed, because thou hearkened not to the voice of Jehovah thy God, to keep his commandments and his statutes which he commanded thee,
Deut. and they shall be upon thee for a sign and for a wonder,  upon thy seed forever.
Deut. Because thou served not Jehovah thy God with joyfulness,  with gladness of heart, by reason of the abundance of all things,
Deut. therefore thou shall serve thine enemies that Jehovah shall send against thee, in hunger,  in thirst,  in nakedness,  in want of all things. And he shall put a yoke of iron upon thy neck, until he has destroyed thee.
Deut. Jehovah will bring a nation against thee from far, from the end of the earth, as the eagle flies, a nation whose tongue thou shall not understand,
Deut. a nation of fierce countenance, that shall not regard the person of the old, nor show favor to the young,
Deut. and shall eat the fruit of thy cattle,  the fruit of thy ground, until thou be destroyed, that also shall not leave thee grain, new wine, or oil, the increase of thy cattle, or the young of thy flock, until they have caused thee to perish.
Deut. And they shall besiege thee in all thy gates, until thy high and fortified walls come down, in which thou trusted, throughout all thy land. And they shall besiege thee in all thy gates throughout all thy land, which Jehovah thy God has given thee.
Deut. And thou shall eat the fruit of thine own body, the flesh of thy sons and of thy daughters, whom Jehovah thy God has given thee, in the siege and in the distress with which thine enemies shall distress thee.
Deut. The man who is tender among you,  very delicate, his eye shall be evil toward his brother,  toward the wife of his bosom,  toward the remnant of his sons whom he has remaining,
Deut. so that he will not give to any of them of the flesh of his sons whom he shall eat, because he has nothing left to him, in the siege and in the distress with which thine enemy shall distress thee in all thy gates.
Deut. The tender and delicate woman among you, who would not adventure to set the sole of her foot upon the ground for delicateness and tenderness, her eye shall be evil toward the husband of her bosom,  toward her son,  toward her daughter,
Deut. and toward her young one who comes out from between her feet,  toward her sons whom she shall bear, for she shall eat them secretly for want of all things, in the siege and in the distress with which thine enemy shall distress thee in thy gates.
Deut. If thou will not observe to do all the words of this law that are written in this book, that thou may fear this glorious and fearful name, JEHOVAH THY GOD,
Deut. then Jehovah will make thy calamities extraordinary,  the calamities of thy seed, even great calamities and of long continuance,  severe sicknesses and of long continuance.
Deut. And he will bring upon thee again all the diseases of Egypt, which thou were afraid of,  they shall cling to thee.
Deut. Also every sickness,  every calamity, which is not written in the book of this law, them Jehovah will bring upon thee, until thou be destroyed.
Deut. And ye shall be left few in number, whereas ye were as the stars of heaven for multitude, because thou did not hearken to the voice of Jehovah thy God.
Deut. And it shall come to pass, that, as Jehovah rejoiced over you to do you good,  to multiply you, so Jehovah will rejoice over you to cause you to perish,  to destroy you. And ye shall be plucked from off the land where thou go in to possess it.
Deut. And Jehovah will scatter thee among all peoples, from the one end of the earth even to the other end of the earth. And there thou shall serve other gods, which thou have not known, thou nor thy fathers, even wood and stone.
Deut. And among these nations thou shall find no ease,  there shall be no rest for the sole of thy foot,  Jehovah will give thee there a trembling heart,  failing of eyes,  pining of soul.
Deut. And thy life shall hang in doubt before thee,  thou shall fear night and day,  shall have no assurance of thy life.
Deut. In the morning thou shall say, Would it were evening! and at evening thou shall say, Would it were morning! for the fear of thy heart which thou shall fear,  for the sight of thine eyes which thou shall see.
Deut. And Jehovah will bring thee into Egypt again with ships, by the way of which I said to thee, Thou shall see it no more again. And there ye shall sell yourselves to your enemies for bondmen and for bondwomen,  no man shall buy you.
Deut. These are the words of the covenant which Jehovah commanded Moses to make with the sons of Israel in the land of Moab, besides the covenant which he made with them in Horeb.
Deut. And Moses called to all Israel,  said to them, Ye have seen all that Jehovah did before your eyes in the land of Egypt to Pharaoh,  to all his servants,  to all his land,
Deut. the great trials which thine eyes saw, the signs,  those great wonders,
Deut. yet Jehovah has not given you a heart to know,  eyes to see,  ears to hear, to this day.
Deut. And I have led you forty years in the wilderness. Your clothes have not grown old upon you,  thy shoe has not grown old upon thy foot.
Deut. Ye have not eaten bread, neither have ye drunk wine or strong drink, that ye may know that I am Jehovah your God.
Deut. And when ye came to this place, Sihon the king of Heshbon,  Og the king of Bashan, came out against us to battle,  we smote them.
Deut. And we took their land,  gave it for an inheritance to the Reubenites,  to the Gadites,  to the half-tribe of the Manassites.
Deut. Keep therefore the words of this covenant,  do them, that ye may prosper in all that ye do.
Deut. Ye stand this day all of you before Jehovah your God-your heads, your tribes, your elders,  your officers, even all the men of Israel,
Deut. your little ones, your wives,  thy sojourner who is in the midst of thy camps, from the hewer of thy wood to the drawer of thy water-
Deut. that thou may enter into the covenant of Jehovah thy God,  into his oath, which Jehovah thy God makes with thee this day,
Deut. that he may establish thee this day to himself for a people,  that he may be to thee a God, as he spoke to thee,  as he swore to thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac,  to Jacob.
Deut. Neither with you only do I make this covenant and this oath,
Deut. but with him who stands here with us this day before Jehovah our God,  also with him who is not here with us this day
Deut. (for ye know how we dwelt in the land of Egypt,  how we came through the midst of the nations through which ye passed,
Deut. and ye have seen their abominations,  their idols, wood and stone, silver and gold, which were among them).
Deut. Lest there should be among you man, or woman, or family, or tribe, whose heart turns away this day from Jehovah our God, to go to serve the gods of those nations. Lest there should be among you a root that bears gall and wormwood,
Deut. and it comes to pass, when he hears the words of this curse, that he blesses himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the stubbornness of my heart, to destroy the moist with the dry.
Deut. Jehovah will not pardon him,  then the anger of Jehovah and his jealousy will smoke against that man,  all the curse that is written in this book shall lie upon him,  Jehovah will blot out his name from under heaven.
Deut. And Jehovah will set him apart to evil out of all the tribes of Israel, according to all the curses of the covenant that is written in this book of the law.
Deut. And the generation to come, your sons who shall rise up after you,  the foreigner who shall come from a far land, shall say, when they see the calamities of that land,  the sicknesses with which Jehovah has made it sick.
Deut. The whole land of it is brimstone,  salt, a burning. It is not sown, nor bears, nor any grass grows in it, like the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah, Admah and Zeboiim, which Jehovah overthrew in his anger,  in his wrath,
Deut. even all the nations shall say, Why has Jehovah done thus to this land? What is the meaning of the heat of this great anger?
Deut. Then men shall say, Because they forsook the covenant of Jehovah, the God of their fathers, which he made with them when he brought them forth out of the land of Egypt,
Deut. and went and served other gods,  worshiped them, gods that they knew not,  that he had not given to them.
Deut. Therefore the anger of Jehovah was kindled against this land, to bring upon it all the curse that is written in this book.
Deut. And Jehovah rooted them out of their land in anger,  in wrath,  in great indignation,  cast them into another land, as at this day.
Deut. The secret things belong to Jehovah our God,  the things that are revealed belong to us and to our sons forever, that we may do all the words of this law.
Deut. And it shall come to pass, when all these things have come upon thee, the blessing and the curse, which I have set before thee,  thou shall call them to mind among all the nations, where Jehovah thy God has driven thee,
Deut. and shall return to Jehovah thy God,  shall obey his voice according to all that I command thee this day, thou and thy sons, with all thy heart,  with all thy soul,
Deut. that then Jehovah thy God will turn thy captivity,  have compassion upon thee,  will return and gather thee from all the peoples where Jehovah thy God has scattered thee.
Deut. If any of thine outcasts be in the outermost parts of heaven, from there Jehovah thy God will gather thee,  from there he will fetch thee.
Deut. And Jehovah thy God will bring thee into the land which thy fathers possessed,  thou shall possess it,  he will do thee good,  multiply thee above thy fathers.
Deut. And Jehovah thy God will circumcise thy heart,  the heart of thy seed, to love Jehovah thy God with all thy heart,  with all thy soul, that thou may live.
Deut. And Jehovah thy God will put all these curses upon thine enemies,  on those who hate thee, who persecuted thee.
Deut. And thou shall return and obey the voice of Jehovah,  do all his commandments which I command thee this day.
Deut. And Jehovah thy God will make thee plenteous in all the work of thy hand, in the fruit of thy body,  in the fruit of thy cattle,  in the fruit of thy ground, for good. For Jehovah will again rejoice over thee for good, as he rejoiced over thy fathers,
Deut. if thou shall obey the voice of Jehovah thy God, to keep his commandments and his statutes which are written in this book of the law; if thou turn to Jehovah thy God with all thy heart,  with all thy soul.
Deut. For this commandment which I command thee this day, it is not too hard for thee, neither is it far off.
Deut. It is not in heaven, that thou should say, Who shall go up for us to heaven,  bring it to us,  make us to hear it, that we may do it?
Deut. Neither is it beyond the sea, that thou should say, Who shall go over the sea for us,  bring it to us,  make us to hear it, that we may do it?
Deut. But the word is very near to thee, in thy mouth,  in thy heart, that thou may do it.
Deut. See, I have set before thee this day life and good,  death and evil,
Deut. in that I command thee this day to love Jehovah thy God, to walk in his ways,  to keep his commandments and his statutes and his ordinances, that thou may live and multiply,  that Jehovah thy God may bless thee in the land where thou go in to possess it.
Deut. But if thy heart turns away,  thou will not hear,  shall be drawn away,  worship other gods,  serve them,
Deut. I declare to you this day, that ye shall surely perish. Ye shall not prolong your days in the land where thou pass over the Jordan to go in to possess it.
Deut. I call heaven and earth to witness against you this day, that I have set before thee life and death, the blessing and the curse. Therefore choose life, that thou may live, thou and thy seed,
Deut. to love Jehovah thy God, to obey his voice,  to cling to him, for he is thy life,  the length of thy days, that thou may dwell in the land which Jehovah swore to thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac,  to Jacob, to give them.
Deut. And Moses went and spoke these words to all Israel.
Deut. And he said to them, I am a hundred and twenty years old this day. I can no more go out and come in. And Jehovah has said to me, Thou shall not go over this Jordan.
Deut. Jehovah thy God, he will go over before thee. He will destroy these nations from before thee,  thou shall dispossess them. Joshua, he shall go over before thee, as Jehovah has spoken.
Deut. And Jehovah will do to them as he did to Sihon and to Og, the kings of the Amorites,  to their land, whom he destroyed.
Deut. And Jehovah will deliver them up before you,  ye shall do to them according to all the commandment which I have commanded you.
Deut. Be strong and of good courage, fear not, nor be frightened at them, for Jehovah thy God, he it is who goes with thee. He will not leave thee, nor forsake thee.
Deut. And Moses called to Joshua,  said to him in the sight of all Israel, Be strong and of good courage. For thou shall go with this people into the land which Jehovah has sworn to their fathers to give them,  thou shall cause them to inherit it.
Deut. And Jehovah, he it is who goes before thee. He will be with thee. He will not fail thee, nor forsake thee. Fear not, neither be dismayed.
Deut. And Moses wrote this law,  delivered it to the priests the sons of Levi, who bore the ark of the covenant of Jehovah,  to all the elders of Israel.
Deut. And Moses commanded them, saying, At the end of every seven years, in the set time of the year of release, in the feast of tabernacles,
Deut. when all Israel has come to appear before Jehovah thy God in the place which he shall choose, thou shall read this law before all Israel in their hearing.
Deut. Assemble the people, the men and the women and the little ones,  thy sojourner who is within thy gates, that they may hear,  that they may learn,  fear Jehovah your God,  observe to do all the words of this law,
Deut. and that their sons who have not known may hear,  learn to fear Jehovah your God as long as ye live in the land where ye go over the Jordan to possess it.
Deut. And Jehovah said to Moses, Behold, thy days approach that thou must die. Call Joshua,  present yourselves in the tent of meeting, that I may give him a command. And Moses and Joshua went,  presented themselves in the tent of meeting.
Deut. And Jehovah appeared in the tent in a pillar of cloud,  the pillar of cloud stood over the door of the tent.
Deut. And Jehovah said to Moses, Behold, thou shall sleep with thy fathers. And this people will rise up,  play the harlot after the strange gods of the land where they go to be among them,  will forsake me,  break my covenant which I have made with them.
Deut. Then my anger shall be kindled against them in that day,  I will forsake them,  I will hide my face from them,  they shall be devoured,  many evils and troubles shall come upon them, so that they will say in that day, Have not these evils come upon us because our God is not among us?
Deut. And I will surely hide my face in that day for all the evil which they shall have wrought, in that they have turned to other gods.
Deut. Now therefore write ye this song for you,  teach thou it the sons of Israel. Put it in their mouths, that this song may be a witness for me against the sons of Israel.
Deut. For when I shall have brought them into the land which I swore to their fathers, flowing with milk and honey,  they shall have eaten and filled themselves,  grown fat, then they will turn to other gods,  serve them,  despise me,  break my covenant.
Deut. And it shall come to pass, when many evils and troubles have come upon them, that this song shall testify before them as a witness, for it shall not be forgotten out of the mouths of their seed. For I know their imagination which they frame this day, before I have brought them into the land which I swore.
Deut. So Moses wrote this song the same day,  taught it to the sons of Israel.
Deut. And he gave Joshua the son of Nun a command,  said, Be strong and of good courage, for thou shall bring the sons of Israel into the land which I swore to them,  I will be with thee.
Deut. And it came to pass, when Moses had made an end of writing the words of this law in a book, until they were finished,
Deut. that Moses commanded the Levites, who bore the ark of the covenant of Jehovah, saying,
Deut. Take this book of the law,  put it by the side of the ark of the covenant of Jehovah your God, that it may be there for a witness against thee.
Deut. For I know thy rebellion,  thy stiff neck. Behold, while I am yet alive with you this day, ye have been rebellious against Jehovah,  how much more after my death?
Deut. Assemble to me all the elders of your tribes,  your officers, that I may speak these words in their ears,  call heaven and earth to witness against them.
Deut. For I know that after my death ye will utterly corrupt yourselves,  turn aside from the way which I have commanded you. And evil will befall you in the latter days, because ye will do that which is evil in the sight of Jehovah, to provoke him to anger through the work of your hands.
Deut. And Moses spoke in the ears of all the assembly of Israel the words of this song, until they were finished:
Deut. Give ear, ye heavens,  I will speak,  let the earth hear the words of my mouth.
Deut. My doctrine shall drop as the rain. My speech shall distil as the dew, as the small rain upon the tender grass,  as the showers upon the herb.
Deut. For I will proclaim the name of Jehovah. Ascribe ye greatness to our God.
Deut. The Rock, his work is perfect, for all his ways are justice, a God of faithfulness and without iniquity, just and right is he.
Deut. They have dealt corruptly with him. They are not his sons, it is their blemish, a perverse and crooked generation.
Deut. Do ye thus requite Jehovah, O foolish people and unwise? Is not he thy father who has bought thee? He has made thee,  established thee.
Deut. Remember the days of old. Consider the years of many generations. Ask thy father,  he will show thee, thine elders,  they will tell thee.
Deut. When the Most High gave to the nations their inheritance, when he separated the sons of men, he set the bounds of the peoples according to the number of the sons of Israel.
Deut. For Jehovah's portion is his people. Jacob is the lot of his inheritance.
Deut. He found him in a desert land,  in the waste howling wilderness. He compassed him about. He cared for him. He kept him as the apple of his eye.
Deut. As an eagle that stirs up her nest, that flutters over her young, he spread abroad his wings. He took them. He bore them on his pinions.
Deut. Jehovah alone led him,  there was no foreign god with him.
Deut. He made him ride on the high places of the earth,  he ate the increase of the field,  he made him to suck honey out of the rock,  oil out of the flinty rock,
Deut. butter of the herd,  milk of the flock, with fat of lambs,  rams of the breed of Bashan,  goats, with the finest of the wheat,  of the blood of the grape thou drank wine.
Deut. But Jeshurun grew fat,  kicked. Thou have grown fat. Thou have grown thick. Thou have become sleek. Then he forsook God who made him,  lightly esteemed the Rock of his salvation.
Deut. They moved him to jealousy with strange gods. With abominations they provoked him to anger.
Deut. They sacrificed to demons, not God, to gods that they knew not, to new gods that came up of late, which your fathers did not dread.
Deut. Thou are unmindful of the Rock that begot thee,  have forgotten God who gave thee birth.
Deut. And Jehovah saw,  abhorred, because of the provocation of his sons and his daughters.
Deut. And he said, I will hide my face from them. I will see what their end shall be. For they are a very perverse generation, sons in whom is no faithfulness.
Deut. They have moved me to jealousy with that which is not God. They have provoked me to anger with their vanities,  I will move them to jealousy with a non-nation. I will provoke them to anger with a foolish nation.
Deut. For a fire is kindled in my anger,  burns to the lowest Sheol,  devours the earth with its increase,  sets on fire the foundations of the mountains.
Deut. I will heap evils upon them. I will spend my arrows upon them,
Deut. to be wasted with hunger,  devoured with burning heat and bitter destruction. And I will send upon them the teeth of beasts, with the poison of crawling things of the dust.
Deut. Outside the sword shall bereave,  in the chambers terror, to both young man and virgin, the suckling with the man of gray hairs.
Deut. I said, I would scatter them afar, I would make the remembrance of them to cease from among men,
Deut. were it not that I feared the provocation of the enemy, lest their adversaries should judge amiss, lest they should say, Our hand is exalted,  Jehovah has not done all this.
Deut. For they are a nation void of counsel,  there is no understanding in them.
Deut. Oh that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider their latter end!
Deut. How should one chase a thousand,  two put ten thousand to flight unless their Rock had sold them,  Jehovah had delivered them up?
Deut. For their rock is not as our Rock, even our enemies themselves being judges.
Deut. For their vine is of the vine of Sodom,  of the fields of Gomorrah. Their grapes are grapes of gall, their clusters are bitter.
Deut. Their wine is the poison of serpents,  the cruel venom of asps.
Deut. Is not this laid up in store with me, sealed up among my treasures?
Deut. Vengeance is for me,  recompense at the time when their foot shall slide. For the day of their calamity is at hand,  the things that are to come upon them shall make haste.
Deut. For Jehovah will judge his people,  regrets for his servants, when he sees that their power is gone,  there is none remaining, shut up or left at large.
Deut. And he will say, Where are their gods, the rock in which they took refuge,
Deut. which ate the fat of their sacrifices,  drank the wine of their drink offering? Let them rise up and help you, let them be your protection.
Deut. See now that I, even I, am he,  there is no god with me. I kill,  I make alive. I wound,  I heal. And there is none that can deliver out of my hand.
Deut. For I lift up my hand to heaven,  say, As I live forever,
Deut. if I whet my glittering sword,  my hand takes hold on judgment, I will render vengeance to my adversaries,  will recompense those who hate me.
Deut. I will make my arrows drunk with blood,  my sword shall devour flesh, with the blood of the slain and the captives, from the head of the leaders of the enemy.
Deut. Rejoice, O ye Gentiles, with his people. For he will avenge the blood of his servants,  will render vengeance to his adversaries,  will recompense those who hate him,  will make expiation for his land, for his people.
Deut. And Moses came and spoke all the words of this song in the ears of the people, he and Joshua the son of Nun.
Deut. And Moses made an end of speaking all these words to all Israel.
Deut. And he said to them, Set your heart to all the words which I testify to you this day, which ye shall command your sons to observe to do, even all the words of this law.
Deut. For it is no vain thing for you, because it is your life,  through this thing ye shall prolong your days in the land where ye go over the Jordan to possess it.
Deut. And Jehovah spoke to Moses that selfsame day, saying,
Deut. Get thee up onto this mountain of Abarim, to mount Nebo, which is in the land of Moab, that is opposite Jericho,  behold the land of Canaan, which I give to the sons of Israel for a possession.
Deut. And die on the mount where thou go up,  be gathered to thy people, as Aaron thy brother died in mount Hor,  was gathered to his people,
Deut. because ye trespassed against me in the midst of the sons of Israel at the waters of Meribah of Kadesh, in the wilderness of Zin, because ye did not sanctify me in the midst of the sons of Israel.
Deut. For thou shall see the land before thee,  thou shall not go there into the land which I give the sons of Israel.
Deut. And this is the blessing with which Moses the man of God blessed the sons of Israel before his death.
Deut. And he said, Jehovah came from Sinai,  rose from Seir to them. He shined forth from mount Paran,  he came from the ten thousands of holy ones. At his right hand was a fiery law for them.
Deut. Yea, he loves the people. All his sanctified are in thy hand,  they sat down at thy feet. He shall receive from thy words.
Deut. Moses commanded for us a law, an inheritance for the assembly of Jacob.
Deut. And he was king in Jeshurun when the heads of the people were gathered, all the tribes of Israel together.
Deut. Let Reuben live,  not die, nor let his men be few.
Deut. And this is of Judah: And he said, Hear, Jehovah, the voice of Judah,  bring him into his people. With his hands he contended for himself,  thou shall be a help against his adversaries.
Deut. And of Levi he said, Thy Thummim and thy Urim are with thy holy man, whom thou proved at Massah, with whom thou strove at the waters of Meribah,
Deut. who said of his father,  of his mother, I have not seen him, neither did he acknowledge his brothers, nor knew he his own sons, for they have observed thy word,  keep thy covenant.
Deut. They shall teach Jacob thine ordinances,  Israel thy law. They shall put incense before thee,  whole burnt offering upon thine altar.
Deut. Bless, Jehovah, his substance,  accept the work of his hands. Smite through the loins of those who rise up against him,  of those who hate him, that they not rise again.
Deut. Of Benjamin he said, The beloved of Jehovah shall dwell in safety by him. He covers him all the day long,  he dwells between his shoulders.
Deut. And of Joseph he said, Blessed of Jehovah be his land, for the precious things of heaven, for the dew,  for the deep that couches beneath,
Deut. and for the precious things of the fruits of the sun,  for the precious things of the growth of the moons,
Deut. and for the chief things of the ancient mountains,  for the precious things of the everlasting hills,
Deut. and for the precious things of the earth and the fullness of it,  the good will of him who dwelt in the bush. Let it come upon the head of Joseph,  upon the crown of the head of him who was separate from his brothers.
Deut. The firstling of his herd, majesty is his. And his horns are the horns of the wild-ox. With them he shall push the peoples, all of them, even the ends of the earth. And they are the ten thousands of Ephraim,  they are the thousands of Manasseh.
Deut. And of Zebulun he said, Rejoice, Zebulun, in thy going out, , Issachar, in thy tents.
Deut. They shall call the peoples to the mountain. There they shall offer sacrifices of righteousness, for they shall suck the abundance of the seas,  the hidden treasures of the sand.
Deut. And of Gad he said, Blessed be he who enlarges Gad. He dwells as a lioness,  tears the arm, yea, the crown of the head.
Deut. And he provided the first part for himself, for there was the lawgiver's portion reserved. And he came with the heads of the people. He executed the righteousness of Jehovah,  his ordinances with Israel.
Deut. And of Dan he said, Dan is a lion's whelp that leaps forth from Bashan.
Deut. And of Naphtali he said, O Naphtali, satisfied with favor,  full with the blessing of Jehovah, possess thou the west and the south.
Deut. And of Asher he said, Blessed be Asher with sons. Let him be acceptable to his brothers,  let him dip his foot in oil.
Deut. Thy bars shall be iron and brass,  as thy days, so shall thy strength be.
Deut. There is none like God, O Jeshurun, who rides upon the heavens for thy help,  in his excellency on the skies.
Deut. The eternal God is thy dwelling-place,  underneath are the everlasting arms. And he thrust out the enemy from before thee,  said, Destroy.
Deut. And Israel dwells in safety, the fountain of Jacob alone, in a land of grain and new wine. Yea, his heavens drop down dew.
Deut. Happy are thou, O Israel. Who is like thee, a people saved by Jehovah, the shield of thy help,  the sword of thy excellency! And thine enemies shall submit themselves to thee,  thou shall tread upon their high places.
Deut. And Moses went up from the plains of Moab to mount Nebo, to the top of Pisgah, that is opposite Jericho. And Jehovah showed him all the land of Gilead, to Dan,
Deut. and all Naphtali,  the land of Ephraim and Manasseh,  all the land of Judah, to the farther sea,
Deut. and the South,  the Plain of the valley of Jericho the city of palm trees, to Zoar.
Deut. And Jehovah said to him, This is the land which I swore to Abraham, to Isaac,  to Jacob, saying, I will give it to thy seed. I have caused thee to see it with thine eyes,  thou shall not go over there.
Deut. So Moses the servant of Jehovah died there in the land of Moab, according to the word of Jehovah.
Deut. And he buried him in the valley in the land of Moab opposite Beth-peor,  no man knows of his sepulcher to this day.
Deut. And Moses was a hundred and twenty years old when he died. His eye was not dim, nor his natural force abated.
Deut. And the sons of Israel wept for Moses in the plains of Moab thirty days. So the days of weeping and mourning for Moses were ended.
Deut. And Joshua the son of Nun was full of the spirit of wisdom, for Moses had laid his hands upon him. And the sons of Israel hearkened to him,  did as Jehovah commanded Moses.
Deut. And there has not arisen a prophet since in Israel like Moses, whom Jehovah knew face to face,
Deut. in all the signs and the wonders, which Jehovah sent him to do in the land of Egypt, to Pharaoh,  to all his servants,  to all his land,
Deut. and in all the mighty hand,  in all the great terror, which Moses wrought in the sight of all Israel.
Joshua
Josh. Now it came to pass after the death of Moses the servant of Jehovah, that Jehovah spoke to Joshua the son of Nun, Moses' minister, saying,
Josh. Moses my servant is dead. Now therefore arise, go over this Jordan, thou,  all this people, to the land which I give to them, even to the sons of Israel.
Josh. Every place that the sole of your foot shall tread upon, to you I have given it, as I spoke to Moses.
Josh. From the wilderness,  this Lebanon, even to the great river, the river Euphrates, all the land of the Hittites,  to the great sea toward the going down of the sun, shall be your border.
Josh. There shall not any man be able to stand before thee all the days of thy life. As I was with Moses, so I will be with thee. I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee.
Josh. Be strong and of good courage, for thou shall cause this people to inherit the land which I swore to their fathers to give them.
Josh. Only be strong and very courageous to observe to do according to all the law, which Moses my servant commanded thee. Turn not from it to the right hand or to the left, that thou may have good success wherever thou go.
Josh. This book of the law shall not depart out of thy mouth,  thou shall meditate on it day and night, that thou may observe to do according to all that is written in it, for then thou shall make thy way prosperous,  then thou shall have good success.
Josh. Have I not commanded thee? Be strong and of good courage. Be not frightened, neither be thou dismayed, for Jehovah thy God is with thee wherever thou go.
Josh. Then Joshua commanded the officers of the people, saying,
Josh. Pass through the midst of the camp,  command the people, saying, Prepare food for you, for within three days ye are to pass over this Jordan to go in to possess the land, which Jehovah your God gives you to possess it.
Josh. And to the Reubenites,  to the Gadites,  to the half-tribe of Manasseh, Joshua spoke, saying,
Josh. Remember the word which Moses the servant of Jehovah commanded you, saying, Jehovah your God gives you rest,  will give you this land.
Josh. Your wives, your little ones,  your cattle, shall abide in the land which Moses gave you beyond the Jordan,  ye shall pass over before your brothers armed, all the mighty men of valor,  shall help them
Josh. until Jehovah has given your brothers rest, as you,  they also have possessed the land which Jehovah your God gives them. Then ye shall return to the land of your possession,  possess it, which Moses the servant of Jehovah gave you beyond the Jordan toward the sunrise.
Josh. And they answered Joshua, saying, All that thou have commanded us we will do,  wherever thou send us we will go.
Josh. According as we hearkened to Moses in all things, so will we hearken to thee. Only Jehovah thy God be with thee, as he was with Moses.
Josh. Whoever he is who shall rebel against thy commandment,  shall not hearken to thy words in all that thou command him, he shall be put to death. Only be strong and of good courage.
Josh. And Joshua the son of Nun sent out of Shittim two men as spies secretly, saying, Go, view the land,  Jericho. And they went and came into the house of a harlot whose name was Rahab,  lay down there.
Josh. And it was told the king of Jericho, saying, Behold, men came in here tonight of the sons of Israel to search out the land.
Josh. And the king of Jericho sent to Rahab, saying, Bring forth the men who came to thee, who have entered into thy house, for they have come to search out all the land.
Josh. And the woman took the two men,  hid them. And she said, Yes, the men came to me,  I did not know from where they were.
Josh. And it came to pass about the time of the shutting of the gate, when it was dark, that the men went out. Where the men went I know not. Pursue after them quickly, for ye will overtake them.
Josh. But she had brought them up to the roof,  hid them with the stalks of flax, which she had laid in order upon the roof.
Josh. And the men pursued after them the way to the Jordan to the fords,  as soon as those who pursued after them were gone out, they shut the gate.
Josh. And before they were laid down, she came up to them upon the roof.
Josh. And she said to the men, I know that Jehovah has given you the land,  that the fear of you has fallen upon us. And that all the inhabitants of the land melt away before you.
Josh. For we have heard how Jehovah dried up the water of the Red Sea before you when ye came out of Egypt,  what ye did to the two kings of the Amorites who were beyond the Jordan, to Sihon and to Og, whom ye utterly destroyed.
Josh. And as soon as we had heard it, our hearts melted, neither did there remain any more spirit in any man because of you, for Jehovah your God, he is God in heaven above,  on earth beneath.
Josh. Now therefore, I pray you, swear to me by Jehovah, since I have dealt kindly with you, that ye also will deal kindly with my father's house,  give me a true token,
Josh. and that ye will save alive my father,  my mother,  my brothers,  my sisters,  all that they have,  will deliver our lives from death.
Josh. And the men said to her, Our life for yours if ye do not utter this our business. And it shall be, when Jehovah gives us the land, that we will deal kindly and truly with thee.
Josh. Then she let them down by a cord through the window, for her house was upon the side of the wall,  she dwelt upon the wall.
Josh. And she said to them, Get you to the mountain lest the pursuers come upon you. And hide yourselves there three days, until the pursuers be returned,  afterward ye may go your way.
Josh. And the men said to her, We will be guiltless of this thine oath which thou have made us to swear.
Josh. Behold, when we come into the land, thou shall bind this line of scarlet cord in the window which thou let us down by. And thou shall gather to thee into the house thy father,  thy mother,  thy brothers,  all thy father's household.
Josh. And it shall be, that whoever shall go out of the doors of thy house into the street, his blood shall be upon his head,  we shall be guiltless. And whoever shall be with thee in the house, his blood shall be on our head if any hand be upon him.
Josh. But if thou utter this our business, then we shall be guiltless of thine oath which thou have made us to swear.
Josh. And she said, According to your words, so be it. And she sent them away,  they departed. And she bound the scarlet line in the window.
Josh. And they went,  came to the mountain,  abode there three days, until the pursuers were returned. And the pursuers sought them throughout all the way,  did not find them.
Josh. Then the two men returned,  descended from the mountain,  passed over,  came to Joshua the son of Nun. And they told him all that had befallen them.
Josh. And they said to Joshua, Truly Jehovah has delivered into our hands all the land,  moreover all the inhabitants of the land melt away before us.
Josh. And Joshua rose up early in the morning. And they moved from Shittim,  came to the Jordan, he and all the sons of Israel,  they lodged there before they passed over.
Josh. And it came to pass after three days, that the officers went through the midst of the camp,
Josh. and they commanded the people, saying, When ye see the ark of the covenant of Jehovah your God,  the priests the Levites bearing it, then ye shall move from your place,  go after it.
Josh. Yet there shall be a space between you and it, about two thousand cubits by measure. Do not come near to it, that ye may know the way by which ye must go, for ye have not passed this way heretofore.
Josh. And Joshua said to the people, Sanctify yourselves, for tomorrow Jehovah will do wonders among you.
Josh. And Joshua spoke to the priests, saying, Take up the ark of the covenant,  pass over before the people. And they took up the ark of the covenant,  went before the people.
Josh. And Jehovah said to Joshua, This day I will begin to magnify thee in the sight of all Israel, that they may know that, as I was with Moses, so I will be with thee.
Josh. And thou shall command the priests who bear the ark of the covenant, saying, When ye have come to the brink of the waters of the Jordan, ye shall stand still in the Jordan.
Josh. And Joshua said to the sons of Israel, Come here,  hear the words of Jehovah your God.
Josh. And Joshua said, Hereby ye shall know that the living God is among you,  that he will without fail drive out from before you the Canaanite,  the Hittite,  the Hivite,  the Perizzite,  the Girgashite,  the Amorite,  the Jebusite.
Josh. Behold, the ark of the covenant of the Lord of all the earth passes over before you into the Jordan.
Josh. Now therefore take for you twelve men out of the tribes of Israel, for every tribe a man.
Josh. And it shall come to pass, when the soles of the feet of the priests who bear the ark of Jehovah, the Lord of all the earth, shall rest in the waters of the Jordan, that the waters of the Jordan shall be cut off, even the waters that come down from above,  they shall stand in one heap.
Josh. And it came to pass, when the people moved from their tents to pass over the Jordan-the priests who bore the ark of the covenant being before the people-
Josh. and when those who bore the ark came to the Jordan,  the feet of the priests who bore the ark were dipped in the brink of the water (for the Jordan overflows all its banks all the time of harvest),
Josh. that the waters which came down from above, stood,  rose up in one heap a great way off, at Adam, the city that is beside Zarethan,  those that went down toward the sea of the Arabah, even the Salt Sea, were wholly cut off. And the people passed over right against Jericho.
Josh. And the priests who bore the ark of the covenant of Jehovah stood firm on dry ground in the midst of the Jordan,  all Israel passed over on dry ground until all the nation were passed clean over the Jordan.
Josh. And it came to pass, when all the nation were clean passed over the Jordan, that Jehovah spoke to Joshua, saying,
Josh. Take for you twelve men out of the people, a man out of every tribe,
Josh. and command ye them, saying, Take for you here out of the midst of the Jordan, out of the place where the priests' feet stood firm, twelve stones,  carry them over with you,  lay them down in the lodging-place where ye shall lodge this night.
Josh. Then Joshua called the twelve men, whom he had prepared of the sons of Israel, a man out of every tribe.
Josh. And Joshua said to them, Pass over before the ark of Jehovah your God into the midst of the Jordan,  take ye up every man of you a stone upon his shoulder, according to the number of the tribes of the sons of Israel,
Josh. that this may be a sign among you, that, when your children ask in time to come, saying, What do ye mean by these stones?
Josh. Then ye shall say to them, Because the waters of the Jordan were cut off before the ark of the covenant of Jehovah. When it passed over the Jordan, the waters of the Jordan were cut off. And these stones shall be for a memorial to the sons of Israel forever.
Josh. And the sons of Israel did so as Joshua commanded,  took up twelve stones out of the midst of the Jordan, as Jehovah spoke to Joshua, according to the number of the tribes of the sons of Israel,  they carried them over with them to the place where they lodged,  laid them down there.
Josh. And Joshua set up twelve stones in the midst of the Jordan, in the place where the feet of the priests who bore the ark of the covenant stood,  they are there to this day.
Josh. For the priests who bore the ark stood in the midst of the Jordan until everything was finished that Jehovah commanded Joshua to speak to the people, according to all that Moses commanded Joshua. And the people hastened and passed over.
Josh. And it came to pass, when all the people were clean passed over, that the ark of Jehovah passed over,  the priests, in the presence of the people.
Josh. And the sons of Reuben,  the sons of Gad,  the half-tribe of Manasseh, passed over armed before the sons of Israel, as Moses spoke to them.
Josh. About forty thousand ready armed for war passed over before Jehovah to battle, to the plains of Jericho.
Josh. On that day Jehovah magnified Joshua in the sight of all Israel,  they feared him, as they feared Moses, all the days of his life.
Josh. And Jehovah spoke to Joshua, saying,
Josh. Command the priests who bear the ark of the testimony, that they come up out of the Jordan.
Josh. Joshua therefore commanded the priests, saying, Come ye up out of the Jordan.
Josh. And it came to pass, when the priests who bore the ark of the covenant of Jehovah came up out of the midst of the Jordan,  the soles of the priests' feet were lifted up to the dry ground, that the waters of the Jordan returned to their place,  went over all its banks, as formerly.
Josh. And the people came up out of the Jordan on the tenth day of the first month,  encamped in Gilgal on the east border of Jericho.
Josh. And those twelve stones, which they took out of the Jordan, Joshua set up in Gilgal.
Josh. And he spoke to the sons of Israel, saying, When your sons shall ask their fathers in time to come, saying, What do these stones mean?
Josh. Then ye shall let your sons know, saying, Israel came over this Jordan on dry land.
Josh. For Jehovah your God dried up the waters of the Jordan from before you, until ye were passed over, as Jehovah your God did to the Red Sea, which he dried up from before us, until we were passed over,
Josh. that all the peoples of the earth may know the hand of Jehovah, that it is mighty, that ye may fear Jehovah your God forever.
Josh. And it came to pass, when all the kings of the Amorites, who were beyond the Jordan westward,  all the kings of the Canaanites, who were by the sea, heard how that Jehovah had dried up the waters of the Jordan from before the sons of Israel until we were passed over, that their heart melted, neither was there spirit in them any more, because of the sons of Israel.
Josh. At that time Jehovah said to Joshua, Make for thee knives of flint,  circumcise again the sons of Israel the second time.
Josh. And Joshua made him knives of flint,  circumcised the sons of Israel at the hill of the foreskins.
Josh. And this is the reason why Joshua circumcised: All the people who came forth out of Egypt, who were males, even all the men of war, died in the wilderness by the way after they came forth out of Egypt.
Josh. For all the people who came out were circumcised,  all the people who were born in the wilderness by the way as they came forth out of Egypt, they had not circumcised.
Josh. For the sons of Israel walked forty years in the wilderness till all the nation, even the men of war who came forth out of Egypt, were consumed, because they did not hearken to the voice of Jehovah, to whom Jehovah swore that he would not let them see the land which Jehovah swore to their fathers that he would give us, a land flowing with milk and honey.
Josh. And their sons, whom he raised up in their stead, them Joshua circumcised, for they were uncircumcised because they had not circumcised them by the way.
Josh. And it came to pass, when they had done circumcising all the nation, that they abode in their places in the camp, till they were recovered.
Josh. And Jehovah said to Joshua, This day I have rolled away the reproach of Egypt from off you. Therefore the name of that place was called Gilgal, to this day.
Josh. And the sons of Israel encamped in Gilgal. And they kept the Passover on the fourteenth day of the month at evening in the plains of Jericho.
Josh. And they ate of the produce of the land on the morrow after the Passover, unleavened cakes and parched grain, in the selfsame day.
Josh. And the manna ceased on the morrow, after they had eaten of the produce of the land. Neither had the sons of Israel manna any more,  they ate of the fruit of the land of Canaan that year.
Josh. And it came to pass, when Joshua was by Jericho, that he lifted up his eyes and looked, , behold, there stood a man opposite him with his sword drawn in his hand. And Joshua went to him,  said to him, Are thou for us, or for our adversaries?
Josh. And he said, No,  as captain of the army of Jehovah I have now come. And Joshua fell on his face to the earth,  worshiped,  said to him, What does my lord say to his servant?
Josh. And the captain of Jehovah's army said to Joshua, Put off thy shoe from off thy foot, for the place on which thou stand is holy. And Joshua did so.
Josh. Now Jericho was shut up tight because of the sons of Israel. None went out,  none came in.
Josh. And Jehovah said to Joshua, See, I have given Jericho into thy hand,  the king of it,  the mighty men of valor.
Josh. And ye shall encompass the city, all the men of war, going around the city once. Thus shall thou do six days.
Josh. And seven priests shall bear seven trumpets of rams' horns before the ark. And the seventh day ye shall encompass the city seven times,  the priests shall blow the trumpets.
Josh. And it shall be, that, when they make a long blast with the ram's horn,  when ye hear the sound of the trumpet, all the people shall shout with a great shout. And the wall of the city shall fall down flat,  the people shall go up every man straight before him.
Josh. And Joshua the son of Nun called the priests,  said to them, Take up the ark of the covenant,  let seven priests bear seven trumpets of rams' horns before the ark of Jehovah.
Josh. And they said to the people, Pass on,  encompass the city,  let the armed men pass on before the ark of Jehovah.
Josh. And it was so, that, when Joshua had spoken to the people, the seven priests bearing the seven trumpets of rams' horns before Jehovah passed on,  blew the trumpets. And the ark of the covenant of Jehovah followed them.
Josh. And the armed men went before the priests who blew the trumpets,  the rearward went behind the ark, the priests blowing the trumpets as they went.
Josh. And Joshua commanded the people, saying, Ye shall not shout, nor let your voice be heard, neither shall any word proceed out of your mouth until the day I bid you shout. Then ye shall shout.
Josh. So he caused the ark of Jehovah to encompass the city, going around it once. And they came into the camp,  lodged in the camp.
Josh. And Joshua rose early in the morning,  the priests took up the ark of Jehovah.
Josh. And the seven priests bearing the seven trumpets of rams' horns before the ark of Jehovah went on continually,  blew the trumpets. And the armed men went before them,  the rearward came behind the ark of Jehovah, the priests blowing the trumpets as they went.
Josh. And the second day they encompassed the city once,  returned into the camp. So they did six days.
Josh. And it came to pass on the seventh day, that they rose early at the dawning of the day,  encompassed the city according to the same manner seven times. Only on that day they encompassed the city seven times.
Josh. And it came to pass at the seventh time, when the priests blew the trumpets, Joshua said to the people, Shout, for Jehovah has given you the city.
Josh. And the city shall be set apart, even it and all that is in it, to Jehovah. Only Rahab the harlot shall live, she and all who are with her in the house, because she hid the messengers that we sent.
Josh. But as for you, only keep yourselves from what is set apart, lest when ye have set it apart, ye take from what is set apart. So ye would make the camp of Israel accursed,  trouble it.
Josh. But all the silver,  gold,  vessels of brass and iron, are holy to Jehovah. They shall come into the treasury of Jehovah.
Josh. So the people shouted,  the priests blew the trumpets. And it came to pass, when the people heard the sound of the trumpet, that the people shouted with a great shout,  the wall fell down flat, so that the people went up into the city, every man straight before him,  they took the city.
Josh. And they utterly destroyed all that was in the city, both man and woman, both young and old,  ox,  sheep,  donkey, with the edge of the sword.
Josh. And Joshua said to the two men who had spied out the land, Go into the harlot's house,  bring out from there the woman,  all that she has, as ye swore to her.
Josh. And the young men, the spies, went in,  brought out Rahab,  her father,  her mother,  her brothers,  all that she had. They also brought out all her kindred,  they set them outside the camp of Israel.
Josh. And they burnt the city with fire,  all that was in it. Only the silver,  the gold,  the vessels of brass and of iron, they put into the treasury of the house of Jehovah.
Josh. But Joshua saved alive Rahab the harlot,  her father's household,  all that she had. And she dwelt in the midst of Israel to this day, because she hid the messengers whom Joshua sent to spy out Jericho.
Josh. And Joshua charged them with an oath at that time, saying, Cursed be the man before Jehovah who rises up and builds this city Jericho. With the loss of his firstborn he shall lay the foundation of it,  with the loss of his youngest son he shall set up the gates of it.
Josh. So Jehovah was with Joshua,  his fame was in all the land.
Josh. But the sons of Israel committed a trespass in what was set apart. For Achan, the son of Carmi, the son of Zabdi, the son of Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, took from what was set apart,  the anger of Jehovah was kindled against the sons of Israel.
Josh. And Joshua sent men from Jericho to Ai, which is beside Beth-aven, on the east side of Bethel,  spoke to them, saying, Go up and spy out the land. And the men went up and spied out Ai.
Josh. And they returned to Joshua,  said to him, Let not all the people go up,  let about two or three thousand men go up and smite Ai. Do not make all the people to toil there, for they are but few.
Josh. So there went up there of the people about three thousand men. And they fled before the men of Ai.
Josh. And the men of Ai smote of them about thirty-six men. And they chased them from before the gate even to Shebarim,  smote them at the descent. And the hearts of the people melted,  became as water.
Josh. And Joshua tore his clothes,  fell to the earth upon his face before the ark of Jehovah until the evening, he and the elders of Israel,  they put dust upon their heads.
Josh. And Joshua said, Alas, O lord Jehovah, why have thou at all brought this people over the Jordan, to deliver us into the hand of the Amorites, to cause us to perish? Would that we had been content and dwelt beyond the Jordan!
Josh. Oh, Lord, what shall I say after Israel has turned their backs before their enemies!
Josh. For the Canaanites and all the inhabitants of the land will hear of it,  will encompass us around,  cut off our name from the earth,  what will thou do for thy great name?
Josh. And Jehovah said to Joshua, Get thee up. Why are thou thus fallen upon thy face?
Josh. Israel has sinned. Yes, they have even transgressed my covenant which I commanded them. Yes, they have even taken from what was set apart,  have also stolen,  also dissembled. And they have even put it among their own stuff.
Josh. Therefore the sons of Israel cannot stand before their enemies. They turn their backs before their enemies because they have become accursed. I will not be with you any more unless ye destroy what was set apart from among you.
Josh. Up, sanctify the people,  say, Sanctify yourselves against tomorrow. For thus says Jehovah, the God of Israel, There is what has been set apart in the midst of thee, O Israel. Thou cannot stand before thine enemies until ye take away the devoted thing from among you.
Josh. In the morning therefore ye shall be brought near by your tribes,  it shall be, that the tribe which Jehovah takes shall come near by families,  the family which Jehovah shall take shall come near by households,  the household which Jehovah shall take shall come near man by man.
Josh. And it shall be, that he who is taken with the devoted thing shall be burnt with fire, he and all that he has, because he has transgressed the covenant of Jehovah,  because he has wrought folly in Israel.
Josh. So Joshua rose up early in the morning,  brought Israel near by their tribes,  the tribe of Judah was taken.
Josh. And he brought near the family of Judah,  he took the family of the Zerahites. And he brought near the family of the Zerahites man by man,  Zabdi was taken.
Josh. And he brought near his household man by man,  Achan, the son of Carmi, the son of Zabdi, the son of Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, was taken.
Josh. And Joshua said to Achan, My son, give, I pray thee, glory to Jehovah, the God of Israel,  make confession to him,  tell me now what thou have done. Hide it not from me.
Josh. And Achan answered Joshua,  said, Of a truth I have sinned against Jehovah, the God of Israel,  thus and thus have I done:
Josh. When I saw among the spoil a goodly Babylonian mantle,  two hundred shekels of silver,  a wedge of gold of fifty shekels weight, then I coveted them,  took them. And, behold, they are hid in the ground in the midst of my tent,  the silver under it.
Josh. So Joshua sent messengers,  they ran to the tent. And, behold, it was hid in his tent,  the silver under it.
Josh. And they took them from the midst of the tent,  brought them to Joshua,  to all the sons of Israel,  they laid them down before Jehovah.
Josh. And Joshua,  all Israel with him, took Achan the son of Zerah,  the silver,  the mantle,  the wedge of gold,  his sons,  his daughters,  his oxen,  his donkeys,  his sheep,  his tent,  all that he had,  they brought them up to the valley of Achor.
Josh. And Joshua said, Why have thou troubled us? Jehovah shall trouble thee this day. And all Israel stoned him with stones,  they burned them with fire,  stoned them with stones.
Josh. And they raised over him a great heap of stones, to this day,  Jehovah turned from the fierceness of his anger. Therefore the name of that place was called the valley of Achor to this day.
Josh. And Jehovah said to Joshua, Fear not, neither be thou dismayed. Take all the people of war with thee,  arise, go up to Ai. See, I have given into thy hand the king of Ai,  his people,  his city,  his land.
Josh. And thou shall do to Ai and its king as thou did to Jericho and its king. Only the spoil of it,  the cattle of it, ye shall take for a prey to yourselves. Set thee an ambush for the city behind it.
Josh. So Joshua arose,  all the people of war, to go up to Ai. And Joshua chose out thirty thousand men, the mighty men of valor,  sent them forth by night.
Josh. And he commanded them, saying, Behold, ye shall lie in ambush against the city, behind the city. Go not very far from the city,  be ye all ready,
Josh. and I,  all the people that are with me, will approach to the city. And it shall come to pass, when they come out against us, as at the first, that we will flee before them.
Josh. And they will come out after us, till we have drawn them away from the city, for they will say, They flee before us, as at the first. So we will flee before them.
Josh. And ye shall rise up from the ambush,  take possession of the city, for Jehovah your God will deliver it into your hand.
Josh. And it shall be, when ye have seized upon the city, that ye shall set the city on fire. According to the word of Jehovah shall ye do. See, I have commanded you.
Josh. And Joshua sent them forth,  they went to the ambushment,  abode between Bethel and Ai, on the west side of Ai,  Joshua lodged that night among the people.
Josh. And Joshua arose up early in the morning,  mustered the people,  went up, he and the elders of Israel, before the people to Ai.
Josh. And all the people, even the men of war who were with him, went up,  drew near,  came before the city,  encamped on the north side of Ai. Now there was a valley between him and Ai.
Josh. And he took about five thousand men,  set them in ambush between Bethel and Ai, on the west side of the city.
Josh. So they set the people, even all the army that was on the north of the city,  their ambushment that were on the west of the city,  Joshua went that night into the midst of the valley.
Josh. And it came to pass, when the king of Ai saw it, that they hastened and rose up early,  the men of the city went out against Israel to battle, he and all his people, at the time appointed, before the Arabah,  he did not know that there was an ambush against him behind the city.
Josh. And Joshua and all Israel made as if they were beaten before them,  fled by the way of the wilderness.
Josh. And all the people that were in the city were called together to pursue after them,  they pursued after Joshua,  were drawn away from the city.
Josh. And there was not a man left in Ai or Bethel who did not go out after Israel. And they left the city open,  pursued after Israel.
Josh. And Jehovah said to Joshua, Stretch out the javelin that is in thy hand toward Ai, for I will give it into thy hand. And Joshua stretched out the javelin that was in his hand toward the city.
Josh. And the ambush arose quickly out of their place,  they ran as soon as he had stretched out his hand,  entered into the city,  took it. And they hastened and set the city on fire.
Josh. And when the men of Ai looked behind them, they saw, , behold, the smoke of the city ascended up to heaven,  they had no power to flee this way or that way. And the people who fled to the wilderness turned back upon the pursuers.
Josh. And when Joshua and all Israel saw that the ambush had taken the city,  that the smoke of the city ascended, then they turned again,  killed the men of Ai.
Josh. And the others came forth out of the city against them, so they were in the midst of Israel, some on this side,  some on that side. And they smote them so that they let none of them remain or escape.
Josh. And they took the king of Ai alive,  brought him to Joshua.
Josh. And it came to pass, when Israel had made an end of killing all the inhabitants of Ai in the field, in the wilderness in which they pursued them,  they were all fallen by the edge of the sword until they were consumed, that all Israel returned to Ai,  smote it with the edge of the sword.
Josh. And all who fell that day, both of men and women, were twelve thousand, even all the men of Ai.
Josh. For Joshua did not draw back his hand, with which he stretched out the javelin, until he had utterly destroyed all the inhabitants of Ai.
Josh. Only the cattle and the spoil of that city Israel took for prey to themselves, according to the word of Jehovah which he commanded Joshua.
Josh. So Joshua burnt Ai,  made it a heap forever, even a desolation, to this day.
Josh. And he hanged the king of Ai on a tree until the evening. And at the going down of the sun Joshua commanded,  they took his body down from the tree,  cast it at the entrance of the gate of the city,  raised a great heap of stones on it, to this day.
Josh. Then Joshua built an altar to Jehovah, the God of Israel, in mount Ebal,
Josh. as Moses the servant of Jehovah commanded the sons of Israel, as it is written in the book of the law of Moses, an altar of unhewn stones, upon which no man had lifted up any iron. And they offered burnt offerings on it to Jehovah,  sacrificed peace offerings.
Josh. And he wrote there upon the stones a copy of the law of Moses, which he wrote, in the presence of the sons of Israel.
Josh. And all Israel,  their elders and officers,  their judges, stood on this side of the ark and on that side before the priests the Levites, who bore the ark of the covenant of Jehovah, as well the sojourner as the home born, half of them in front of mount Gerizim,  half of them in front of mount Ebal, as Moses the servant of Jehovah had commanded at the first, that they should bless the people of Israel.
Josh. And afterward he read all the words of the law, the blessing and the curse, according to all that is written in the book of the law.
Josh. There was not a word of all that Moses commanded, which Joshua did not read before all the assembly of Israel,  the women,  the little ones,  the sojourners who were among them.
Josh. And it came to pass, when all the kings who were beyond the Jordan, in the hill-country,  in the lowland,  on all the shore of the great sea in front of Lebanon-the Hittite,  the Amorite, the Canaanite, the Perizzite, the Hivite,  the Jebusite-heard of it,
Josh. that they gathered themselves together to fight with Joshua and with Israel with one accord.
Josh. But when the inhabitants of Gibeon heard what Joshua had done to Jericho and to Ai,
Josh. they also worked shrewdly,  went and made as if they had been ambassadors,  took old sacks upon their donkeys,  wine-skins, old and torn and bound up,
Josh. and old and patched shoes upon their feet,  old garments upon them,  all the bread of their provision was dry and became moldy.
Josh. And they went to Joshua to the camp at Gilgal,  said to him,  to the men of Israel, We have come from a far country, now therefore make ye a covenant with us.
Josh. And the men of Israel said to the Hivites, Perhaps ye dwell among us,  how shall we make a covenant with you?
Josh. And they said to Joshua, We are thy servants. And Joshua said to them, Who are ye,  from where do ye come?
Josh. And they said to him, From a very far country. Thy servants have come because of the name of Jehovah thy God, for we have heard the fame of him,  all that he did in Egypt,
Josh. and all that he did to the two kings of the Amorites who were beyond the Jordan, to Sihon king of Heshbon,  to Og king of Bashan, who was at Ashtaroth.
Josh. And our elders and all the inhabitants of our country spoke to us, saying, Take provision in your hand for the journey,  go to meet them,  say to them, We are your servants,  now make ye a covenant with us.
Josh. This our bread we took hot for our provision out of our houses on the day we came forth to go to you,  now, behold, it is dry,  has become moldy.
Josh. And these wine-skins, which we filled, were new, , behold, they are torn. And these our garments and our shoes have become old by reason of the very long journey.
Josh. And the men took of their provision,  did not ask counsel at the mouth of Jehovah.
Josh. And Joshua made peace with them,  made a covenant with them to let them live,  the rulers of the congregation swore to them.
Josh. And it came to pass at the end of three days after they had made a covenant with them, that they heard that they were their neighbors,  that they dwelt among them.
Josh. And the sons of Israel journeyed,  came to their cities on the third day. Now their cities were Gibeon,  Chephirah,  Beeroth,  Kiriath-jearim.
Josh. And the sons of Israel did not smite them, because the rulers of the congregation had sworn to them by Jehovah, the God of Israel. And all the congregation murmured against the rulers.
Josh. But all the rulers said to all the congregation, We have sworn to them by Jehovah, the God of Israel, now therefore we may not touch them.
Josh. This we will do to them,  let them live, lest wrath be upon us because of the oath which we swore to them.
Josh. And the rulers said to them, Let them live. So they became hewers of wood and drawers of water to all the congregation, as the rulers had spoken to them.
Josh. And Joshua called for them,  he spoke to them, saying, Why have ye beguiled us, saying, We are very far from you, when ye dwell among us?
Josh. Now therefore ye are cursed,  there shall never fail to be bondmen of you, both hewers of wood and drawers of water for the house of my God.
Josh. And they answered Joshua,  said, Because it was certainly told thy servants, how that Jehovah thy God commanded his servant Moses to give you all the land,  to destroy all the inhabitants of the land from before you. Therefore we were very afraid for our lives because of you,  have done this thing.
Josh. And now, behold, we are in thy hand. As it seems good and right to thee to do to us, do.
Josh. And so he did to them,  delivered them out of the hand of the sons of Israel, that they did not kill them.
Josh. And Joshua made them that day hewers of wood and drawers of water for the congregation,  for the altar of Jehovah to this day in the place which he should choose.
Josh. Now it came to pass, when Adoni-zedek king of Jerusalem heard how Joshua had taken Ai,  had utterly destroyed it, as he had done to Jericho and its king, so he had done to Ai and its king,  how the inhabitants of Gibeon had made peace with Israel,  were among them,
Josh. that they feared greatly, because Gibeon was a great city, as one of the royal cities,  because it was greater than Ai,  all the men of it were mighty.
Josh. Therefore Adoni-zedek king of Jerusalem sent to Hoham king of Hebron,  to Piram king of Jarmuth,  to Japhia king of Lachish,  to Debir king of Eglon, saying,
Josh. Come up to me,  help me,  let us smite Gibeon, for it has made peace with Joshua and with the sons of Israel.
Josh. Therefore the five kings of the Amorites, the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebron, the king of Jarmuth, the king of Lachish, the king of Eglon, gathered themselves together,  went up, they and all their armies,  encamped against Gibeon,  made war against it.
Josh. And the men of Gibeon sent to Joshua to the camp to Gilgal, saying, Slack not thy hand from thy servants. Come up to us quickly,  save us,  help us, for all the kings of the Amorites who dwell in the hill-country are gathered together against us.
Josh. So Joshua went up from Gilgal, he,  all the people of war with him,  all the mighty men of valor.
Josh. And Jehovah said to Joshua, Fear them not, for I have delivered them into thy hands. There shall not a man of them stand before thee.
Josh. Joshua therefore came upon them suddenly, for he went up from Gilgal all the night.
Josh. And Jehovah discomfited them before Israel,  he killed them with a great slaughter at Gibeon,  chased them by the way of the ascent of Beth-horon,  smote them to Azekah,  to Makkedah.
Josh. And it came to pass, as they fled from before Israel, while they were at the descent of Beth-horon, that Jehovah cast down great stones from heaven upon them to Azekah,  they died. More died with the hailstones than those whom the sons of Israel killed with the sword.
Josh. Then Joshua spoke to Jehovah in the day when Jehovah delivered up the Amorites before the sons of Israel. And he said in the sight of Israel, Sun, stand thou still upon Gibeon,  thou, Moon, in the valley of Aijalon.
Josh. And the sun stood still,  the moon stayed, until the nation had avenged themselves of their enemies. Is not this written in the book of Jashar? And the sun stayed in the midst of heaven,  hastened not to go down about a whole day.
Josh. And there was no day like that before it or after it, that Jehovah hearkened to the voice of a man, for Jehovah fought for Israel.
Josh. And Joshua returned,  all Israel with him, to the camp at Gilgal.
Josh. And these five kings fled,  hid themselves in the cave at Makkedah.
Josh. And it was told Joshua, saying, The five kings are found hidden in the cave at Makkedah.
Josh. And Joshua said, Roll great stones to the mouth of the cave,  set men by it to keep them,
Josh. but stay ye not. Pursue after your enemies,  smite the hindmost of them. Do not allow them to enter into their cities, for Jehovah your God has delivered them into your hand.
Josh. And it came to pass, when Joshua and the sons of Israel had made an end of killing them with a very great slaughter, till they were consumed,  the remnant which remained of them had entered into the fortified cities,
Josh. that all the people returned to the camp to Joshua at Makkedah in peace. No man moved his tongue against any of the sons of Israel.
Josh. Then Joshua said, Open the mouth of the cave,  bring forth those five kings to me out of the cave.
Josh. And they did so,  brought forth those five kings to him out of the cave, the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebron, the king of Jarmuth, the king of Lachish, the king of Eglon.
Josh. And it came to pass, when they brought forth those kings to Joshua, that Joshua called for all the men of Israel,  said to the chiefs of the men of war who went with him, Come near, put your feet upon the necks of these kings. And they came near,  put their feet upon the necks of them.
Josh. And Joshua said to them, Fear not, nor be dismayed. Be strong and of good courage, for thus shall Jehovah do to all your enemies against whom ye fight.
Josh. And afterward Joshua smote them,  put them to death,  hanged them on five trees. And they were hanging upon the trees until the evening.
Josh. And it came to pass at the time of the going down of the sun, that Joshua commanded,  they took them down off the trees,  cast them into the cave in which they had hidden themselves,  laid great stones on the mouth of the cave, to this very day.
Josh. And Joshua took Makkedah on that day,  smote it with the edge of the sword,  the king of it. He utterly destroyed them and all the souls that were in it. He left none remaining,  he did to the king of Makkedah as he had done to the king of Jericho.
Josh. And Joshua passed from Makkedah,  all Israel with him, to Libnah,  fought against Libnah.
Josh. And Jehovah delivered it also,  the king of it, into the hand of Israel. And he smote it with the edge of the sword,  all the souls that were in it. He left none remaining in it,  he did to the king of it as he had done to the king of Jericho.
Josh. And Joshua passed from Libnah,  all Israel with him, to Lachish,  encamped against it,  fought against it.
Josh. And Jehovah delivered Lachish into the hand of Israel. And he took it on the second day,  smote it with the edge of the sword,  all the souls that were in it, according to all that he had done to Libnah.
Josh. Then Horam king of Gezer came up to help Lachish. And Joshua smote him and his people until he had left him none remaining.
Josh. And Joshua passed from Lachish,  all Israel with him, to Eglon. And they encamped against it,  fought against it.
Josh. And they took it on that day,  smote it with the edge of the sword. And all the souls that were in it he utterly destroyed that day, according to all that he had done to Lachish.
Josh. And Joshua went up from Eglon,  all Israel with him, to Hebron. And they fought against it,
Josh. and they took it,  smote it with the edge of the sword,  the king of it,  all the cities of it,  all the souls that were in it. He left none remaining, according to all that he had done to Eglon,  he utterly destroyed it,  all the souls that were in it.
Josh. And Joshua returned,  all Israel with him, to Debir,  fought against it.
Josh. And he took it,  the king of it,  all the cities of it. And they smote them with the edge of the sword,  utterly destroyed all the souls that were in it. He left none remaining. As he had done to Hebron, so he did to Debir,  to the king of it, as he had done also to Libnah,  to the king of it.
Josh. So Joshua smote all the land, the hill-country,  the South,  the lowland,  the slopes,  all their kings. He left none remaining,  he utterly destroyed all that breathed, as Jehovah, the God of Israel, commanded.
Josh. And Joshua smote them from Kadesh-barnea even to Gaza,  all the country of Goshen, even to Gibeon.
Josh. And all these kings and their land Joshua took at one time, because Jehovah, the God of Israel, fought for Israel.
Josh. And Joshua returned,  all Israel with him, to the camp to Gilgal.
Josh. And it came to pass, when Jabin king of Hazor heard of it, that he sent to Jobab king of Madon,  to the king of Shimron,  to the king of Achshaph,
Josh. and to the kings who were on the north, in the hill-country,  in the Arabah south of Chinneroth,  in the lowland,  in the heights of Dor on the west,
Josh. to the Canaanite on the east and on the west,  the Amorite,  the Hittite,  the Perizzite,  the Jebusite in the hill-country,  the Hivite under Hermon in the land of Mizpah,
Josh. and they went out, they and all their armies with them, much people, even as the sand that is upon the sea-shore in multitude, with horses and chariots, very many.
Josh. And all these kings met together. And they came and encamped together at the waters of Merom, to fight with Israel.
Josh. And Jehovah said to Joshua, Be not afraid because of them, for tomorrow at this time I will deliver them up all slain before Israel. Thou shall hock their horses,  burn their chariots with fire.
Josh. So Joshua came,  all the people of war with him, against them by the waters of Merom suddenly,  fell upon them.
Josh. And Jehovah delivered them into the hand of Israel,  they smote them,  chased them to great Sidon,  to Misrephoth-maim,  to the valley of Mizpeh eastward. And they smote them until they left them none remaining.
Josh. And Joshua did to them as Jehovah bade him. He hocked their horses,  burnt their chariots with fire.
Josh. And Joshua turned back at that time,  took Hazor,  smote the king of it with the sword, for Hazor was formerly the head of all those kingdoms.
Josh. And they smote all the souls who were in it with the edge of the sword, utterly destroying them. There was none left that breathed,  he burnt Hazor with fire.
Josh. And all the cities of those kings,  all the kings of them, Joshua took,  he smote them with the edge of the sword,  utterly destroyed them, as Moses the servant of Jehovah commanded.
Josh. But as for the cities that stood on their mounds, Israel burned none of them, except only Hazor. Joshua burned that.
Josh. And all the spoil of these cities,  the cattle, the sons of Israel took for a prey to themselves,  every man they smote with the edge of the sword until they had destroyed them, neither did they leave any who breathed.
Josh. As Jehovah commanded Moses his servant, so Moses commanded Joshua,  so Joshua did. He left nothing undone of all that Jehovah commanded Moses.
Josh. So Joshua took all that land, the hill-country,  all the South,  all the land of Goshen,  the lowland,  the Arabah,  the hill-country of Israel,  the lowland of the same,
Josh. from mount Halak, that goes up to Seir, even to Baal-gad in the valley of Lebanon under mount Hermon. And he took all their kings,  smote them,  put them to death.
Josh. Joshua made war a long time with all those kings.
Josh. There was not a city that made peace with the sons of Israel, except the Hivites the inhabitants of Gibeon. They took all in battle.
Josh. For it was of Jehovah to harden their hearts, to come against Israel in battle, that he might utterly destroy them, that they might have no favor,  that he might destroy them as Jehovah commanded Moses.
Josh. And Joshua came at that time,  cut off the Anakim from the hill-country, from Hebron, from Debir, from Anab,  from all the hill-country of Judah,  from all the hill-country of Israel. Joshua utterly destroyed them with their cities.
Josh. There was none of the Anakim left in the land of the sons of Israel. Only in Gaza, in Gath,  in Ashdod some remained.
Josh. So Joshua took the whole land, according to all that Jehovah spoke to Moses. And Joshua gave it for an inheritance to Israel according to their divisions by their tribes. And the land had rest from war.
Josh. Now these are the kings of the land, whom the sons of Israel smote,  possessed their land beyond the Jordan toward the sunrise, from the valley of the Arnon to mount Hermon,  all the Arabah eastward:
Josh. Sihon king of the Amorites, who dwelt in Heshbon,  ruled from Aroer, which is on the edge of the valley of the Arnon,  the middle of the valley,  half Gilead, even to the river Jabbok, the border of the sons of Ammon,
Josh. and the Arabah to the sea of Chinneroth, eastward,  to the sea of the Arabah, even the Salt Sea, eastward, the way to Beth-jeshimoth,  on the south, under the slopes of Pisgah,
Josh. and the border of Og king of Bashan, of the remnant of the Rephaim, who dwelt at Ashtaroth and at Edrei,
Josh. and ruled in mount Hermon,  in Salecah,  in all Bashan, to the border of the Geshurites and the Maacathites,  half Gilead, the border of Sihon king of Heshbon.
Josh. Moses the servant of Jehovah and the sons of Israel smote them. And Moses the servant of Jehovah gave it for a possession to the Reubenites,  the Gadites,  the half-tribe of Manasseh.
Josh. And these are the kings of the land whom Joshua and the sons of Israel smote beyond the Jordan westward, from Baal-gad in the valley of Lebanon even to mount Halak, that goes up to Seir,  Joshua gave it to the tribes of Israel for a possession according to their divisions,
Josh. in the hill-country,  in the lowland,  in the Arabah,  in the slopes,  in the wilderness,  in the South, the Hittite, the Amorite,  the Canaanite, the Perizzite, the Hivite,  the Jebusite:
Josh. The king of Jericho, one; the king of Ai, which is beside Bethel, one;
Josh. the king of Jerusalem, one; the king of Hebron, one;
Josh. the king of Jarmuth, one; the king of Lachish, one;
Josh. the king of Eglon, one; the king of Gezer, one;
Josh. the king of Debir, one; the king of Geder, one;
Josh. the king of Hormah, one; the king of Arad, one;
Josh. the king of Libnah, one; the king of Adullam, one;
Josh. the king of Makkedah, one; the king of Bethel, one;
Josh. the king of Tappuah, one; the king of Hepher, one;
Josh. the king of Aphek, one; the king of Lassharon, one;
Josh. the king of Madon, one; the king of Hazor, one;
Josh. the king of Shimron-meron, one; the king of Achshaph, one;
Josh. the king of Taanach, one; the king of Megiddo, one;
Josh. the king of Kedesh, one; the king of Jokneam in Carmel, one;
Josh. the king of Dor in the height of Dor, one; the king of Goiim in Gilgal, one;
Josh. the king of Tirzah, one: all the kings thirty-one.
Josh. Now Joshua was old and well stricken in years,  Jehovah said to him, Thou are old and well stricken in years,  there remains yet very much land to be possessed.
Josh. This is the land that yet remains: all the regions of the Philistines,  all the Geshurites;
Josh. from the Shihor, which is before Egypt, even to the border of Ekron northward, which is reckoned to the Canaanites; the five lords of the Philistines; the Gazites,  the Ashdodites, the Ashkelonites, the Gittites,  the Ekronites; also the Avvim
Josh. on the south; all the land of the Canaanites,  Mearah that belongs to the Sidonians, to Aphek, to the border of the Amorites;
Josh. and the land of the Gebalites,  all Lebanon, toward the sunrise, from Baal-gad under mount Hermon to the entrance of Hamath;
Josh. all the inhabitants of the hill-country from Lebanon to Misrephoth-maim, even all the Sidonians. I will drive them out from before the sons of Israel, only allot thou it to Israel for an inheritance as I have commanded thee.
Josh. Now therefore divide this land for an inheritance to the nine tribes,  the half-tribe of Manasseh.
Josh. With him the Reubenites and the Gadites received their inheritance, which Moses gave them, beyond the Jordan eastward, even as Moses the servant of Jehovah gave them:
Josh. from Aroer, that is on the edge of the valley of the Arnon,  the city that is in the middle of the valley,  all the plain of Medeba to Dibon;
Josh. and all the cities of Sihon king of the Amorites, who reigned in Heshbon, to the border of the sons of Ammon;
Josh. and Gilead,  the border of the Geshurites and Maacathites,  all mount Hermon,  all Bashan to Salecah;
Josh. all the kingdom of Og in Bashan, who reigned in Ashtaroth and in Edrei (the same was left of the remnant of the Rephaim), for these Moses smote,  drove them out.
Josh. Nevertheless the sons of Israel did not drive out the Geshurites, nor the Maacathites,  Geshur and Maacath dwell in the midst of Israel to this day.
Josh. Only to the tribe of Levi he gave no inheritance. The offerings of Jehovah, the God of Israel, made by fire are his inheritance as he spoke to him.
Josh. And Moses gave to the tribe of the sons of Reuben according to their families.
Josh. And their border was from Aroer, that is on the edge of the valley of the Arnon,  the city that is in the middle of the valley,  all the plain by Medeba;
Josh. Heshbon,  all its cities that are in the plain; Dibon,  Bamoth-baal,  Beth-baal-meon,
Josh. and Jahaz,  Kedemoth,  Mephaath,
Josh. and Kiriathaim,  Sibmah,  Zereth-shahar in the mount of the valley,
Josh. and Beth-peor,  the slopes of Pisgah,  Beth-jeshimoth,
Josh. and all the cities of the plain,  all the kingdom of Sihon king of the Amorites who reigned in Heshbon, whom Moses smote with the chiefs of Midian, Evi,  Rekem,  Zur,  Hur,  Reba, the rulers of Sihon who dwelt in the land.
Josh. The sons of Israel also killed Balaam the son of Beor, the diviner, with the sword among the rest of their slain.
Josh. And the border of the sons of Reuben was the Jordan,  the border of it. This was the inheritance of the sons of Reuben according to their families, the cities and the villages of it.
Josh. And Moses gave to the tribe of Gad, to the sons of Gad, according to their families.
Josh. And their border was Jazer,  all the cities of Gilead,  half the land of the sons of Ammon, to Aroer that is before Rabbah,
Josh. and from Heshbon to Ramath-mizpeh,  Betonim,  from Mahanaim to the border of Debir,
Josh. and in the valley, Beth-haram,  Beth-nimrah,  Succoth,  Zaphon, the rest of the kingdom of Sihon king of Heshbon, the Jordan and the border of it, to the outermost part of the sea of Chinnereth beyond the Jordan eastward.
Josh. This is the inheritance of the sons of Gad according to their families, the cities and the villages of it.
Josh. And Moses gave to the half-tribe of Manasseh,  it was for the half-tribe of the sons of Manasseh according to their families.
Josh. And their border was from Mahanaim, all Bashan, all the kingdom of Og king of Bashan,  all the towns of Jair, which are in Bashan, sixty cities.
Josh. And half Gilead,  Ashtaroth,  Edrei, the cities of the kingdom of Og in Bashan, were for the sons of Machir the son of Manasseh, even for the half of the sons of Machir according to their families.
Josh. These are the inheritances which Moses distributed in the plains of Moab, beyond the Jordan at Jericho, eastward.
Josh. But to the tribe of Levi Moses gave no inheritance. Jehovah, the God of Israel, is their inheritance, as he spoke to them.
Josh. And these are the inheritances which the sons of Israel took in the land of Canaan, which Eleazar the priest,  Joshua the son of Nun,  the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the sons of Israel, distributed to them,
Josh. by the lot of their inheritance, as Jehovah commanded by Moses, for the nine tribes,  for the half-tribe.
Josh. For Moses had given the inheritance of the two tribes and the half-tribe beyond the Jordan,  to the Levites he gave no inheritance among them.
Josh. For the sons of Joseph were two tribes, Manasseh and Ephraim. And they gave no portion to the Levites in the land except cities to dwell in with the suburbs of it for their cattle and for their substance.
Josh. As Jehovah commanded Moses, so the sons of Israel did,  they divided the land.
Josh. Then the sons of Judah drew near to Joshua in Gilgal. And Caleb the son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite said to him, Thou know the thing that Jehovah spoke to Moses the man of God concerning me and concerning thee in Kadesh-barnea.
Josh. I was forty years old when Moses the servant of Jehovah sent me from Kadesh-barnea to spy out the land,  I brought him word again as it was in my heart.
Josh. Nevertheless my brothers who went up with me made the heart of the people melt,  I wholly followed Jehovah my God.
Josh. And Moses swore on that day, saying, Surely the land in which thy foot has trodden shall be an inheritance to thee and to thy sons forever because thou have wholly followed Jehovah my God.
Josh. And now, behold, Jehovah has kept me alive, as he spoke, these forty-five years, from the time that Jehovah spoke this word to Moses, while Israel walked in the wilderness. And now, lo, I am this day eighty-five years old.
Josh. As yet I am as strong this day as I was in the day that Moses sent me. As my strength was then, even so is my strength now, for war,  to go out and to come in.
Josh. Now therefore give me this hill-country of which Jehovah spoke in that day. For thou heard in that day how the Anakim were there,  cities great and fortified. It may be that Jehovah will be with me,  I shall drive them out, as Jehovah spoke.
Josh. And Joshua blessed him,  he gave Hebron to Caleb the son of Jephunneh for an inheritance.
Josh. Therefore Hebron became the inheritance of Caleb the son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite to this day because he wholly followed Jehovah, the God of Israel.
Josh. Now the name of Hebron was formerly Kiriath-arba. Arba was the greatest man among the Anakim. And the land had rest from war.
Josh. And the lot for the tribe of the sons of Judah according to their families was to the border of Edom, even to the wilderness of Zin southward, at the outermost part of the south.
Josh. And their south border was from the outermost part of the Salt Sea, from the bay that looks southward.
Josh. And it went out southward of the ascent of Akrabbim,  passed along to Zin,  went up by the south of Kadesh-barnea,  passed along by Hezron,  went up to Addar,  turned about to Karka,
Josh. and it passed along to Azmon,  went out at the brook of Egypt. And the goings out of the border were at the sea. This shall be your south border.
Josh. And the east border was the Salt Sea, even to the end of the Jordan. And the border of the north quarter was from the bay of the sea at the end of the Jordan,
Josh. and the border went up to Beth-hoglah,  passed along by the north of Beth-arabah,  the border went up to the stone of Bohan the son of Reuben,
Josh. and the border went up to Debir from the valley of Achor,  so northward, looking toward Gilgal, that is opposite the ascent of Adummim, which is on the south side of the river,  the border passed along to the waters of En-shemesh. And the goings out of it were at En-rogel,
Josh. and the border went up by the valley of the son of Hinnom to the side of the Jebusite southward (the same is Jerusalem),  the border went up to the top of the mountain that lies before the valley of Hinnom westward, which is at the outermost part of the vale of Rephaim northward,
Josh. and the border extended from the top of the mountain to the fountain of the waters of Nephtoah,  went out to the cities of mount Ephron,  the border extended to Baalah (the same is Kiriath-jearim),
Josh. and the border turned about from Baalah westward to mount Seir,  passed along to the side of mount Jearim on the north (the same is Chesalon),  went down to Beth-shemesh,  passed along by Timnah,
Josh. and the border went out to the side of Ekron northward,  the border extended to Shikkeron,  passed along to mount Baalah,  went out at Jabneel. And the goings out of the border were at the sea.
Josh. And the west border was to the great sea,  the border of it. This is the border of the sons of Judah round about according to their families.
Josh. And to Caleb the son of Jephunneh he gave a portion among the sons of Judah, according to the commandment of Jehovah to Joshua, even Kiriath-arba. Arba was the father of Anak (the same is Hebron).
Josh. And Caleb drove out from there the three sons of Anak: Sheshai,  Ahiman,  Talmai, the sons of Anak.
Josh. And he went up from there against the inhabitants of Debir. Now the name of Debir formerly was Kiriath-sepher.
Josh. And Caleb said, He who smites Kiriath-sepher,  takes it, to him I will give Achsah my daughter to wife.
Josh. And Othniel the son of Kenaz, the brother of Caleb, took it,  he gave him Achsah his daughter to wife.
Josh. And it came to pass, when she came, that she moved him to ask of her father a field. And she alighted from off her donkey,  Caleb said, What would thou?
Josh. And she said, Give me a blessing, because thou have set me in the land of the South, give me also springs of water. And he gave her the upper springs and the nether springs.
Josh. This is the inheritance of the tribe of the sons of Judah according to their families.
Josh. And the outermost cities of the tribe of the sons of Judah toward the border of Edom in the South were thus: Kabzeel,  Eder,  Jagur,
Josh. and Kinah,  Dimonah,  Adadah,
Josh. and Kedesh,  Hazor,  Ithnan,
Josh. Ziph,  Telem,  Bealoth,
Josh. and Hazor-hadattah,  Kerioth-hezron (the same is Hazor),
Josh. Amam,  Shema,  Moladah,
Josh. and Hazar-gaddah,  Heshmon,  Beth-pelet,
Josh. and Hazar-shual,  Beersheba,  Biziothiah,
Josh. Baalah,  Iim,  Ezem,
Josh. and Eltolad,  Chesil,  Hormah,
Josh. and Ziklag,  Madmannah,  Sansannah,
Josh. and Lebaoth,  Shilhim,  Ain,  Rimmon. All the cities are twenty-nine, with their villages.
Josh. In the lowland, Eshtaol,  Zorah,  Ashnah,
Josh. and Zanoah,  En-gannim, Tappuah,  Enam,
Josh. Jarmuth,  Adullam, Socoh,  Azekah,
Josh. and Shaaraim,  Adithaim,  Gederah,  Gederothaim; fourteen cities with their villages.
Josh. Zenan,  Hadashah,  Migdal-gad,
Josh. and Dilean,  Mizpeh,  Joktheel,
Josh. Lachish,  Bozkath,  Eglon,
Josh. and Cabbon,  Lahmam,  Chitlish,
Josh. and Gederoth, Beth-dagon,  Naamah,  Makkedah; sixteen cities with their villages.
Josh. Libnah,  Ether,  Ashan,
Josh. and Iphtah,  Ashnah,  Nezib,
Josh. and Keilah,  Achzib,  Mareshah; nine cities with their villages.
Josh. Ekron, with its towns and its villages,
Josh. from Ekron even to the sea, all that were by the side of Ashdod, with their villages.
Josh. Ashdod, its towns and its villages, Gaza, its towns and its villages, to the brook of Egypt,  the great sea,  the border of it.
Josh. And in the hill-country, Shamir,  Jattir,  Socoh,
Josh. and Dannah,  Kiriath-sannah (the same is Debir),
Josh. and Anab,  Eshtemoh,  Anim,
Josh. and Goshen,  Holon,  Giloh; eleven cities with their villages.
Josh. Arab,  Dumah,  Eshan,
Josh. and Janim,  Beth-tappuah,  Aphekah,
Josh. and Humtah,  Kiriath-arba (the same is Hebron),  Zior; nine cities with their villages.
Josh. Maon, Carmel,  Ziph,  Jutah,
Josh. and Jezreel,  Jokdeam,  Zanoah,
Josh. Kain, Gibeah,  Timnah; ten cities with their villages.
Josh. Halhul, Beth-zur,  Gedor,
Josh. and Maarath,  Beth-anoth,  Eltekon; six cities with their villages.
Josh. Kiriath-baal (the same is Kiriath-jearim),  Rabbah; two cities with their villages.
Josh. In the wilderness, Beth-arabah, Middin,  Secacah,
Josh. and Nibshan,  the City of Salt,  En-gedi; six cities with their villages.
Josh. And as for the Jebusites, the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the sons of Judah could not drive them out,  the Jebusites dwell with the sons of Judah at Jerusalem to this day.
Josh. And the lot came out for the sons of Joseph from the Jordan at Jericho, at the waters of Jericho on the east, even the wilderness, going up from Jericho through the hill-country to Bethel.
Josh. And it went out from Bethel to Luz,  passed along to the border of the Archites to Ataroth,
Josh. and it went down westward to the border of the Japhletites, to the border of Beth-horon the nether, even to Gezer. And the goings out of it were at the sea.
Josh. And the sons of Joseph, Manasseh and Ephraim, took their inheritance.
Josh. And the border of the sons of Ephraim according to their families was thus: the border of their inheritance eastward was Ataroth-addar, to Beth-horon the upper,
Josh. and the border went out westward at Michmethath on the north,  the border turned about eastward to Taanath-shiloh,  passed along it on the east of Janoah,
Josh. and it went down from Janoah to Ataroth,  to Naarah,  reached to Jericho,  went out at the Jordan.
Josh. From Tappuah the border went along westward to the brook of Kanah. And the goings out of it were at the sea. This is the inheritance of the tribe of the sons of Ephraim according to their families,
Josh. together with the cities which were set apart for the sons of Ephraim in the midst of the inheritance of the sons of Manasseh, all the cities with their villages.
Josh. And they did not drive out the Canaanites who dwelt in Gezer,  the Canaanites dwell in the midst of Ephraim to this day,  have become servants to do task work.
Josh. And this was the lot for the tribe of Manasseh, for he was the firstborn of Joseph. As for Machir the firstborn of Manasseh, the father of Gilead, because he was a man of war, therefore he had Gilead and Bashan.
Josh. So it was for the rest of the sons of Manasseh according to their families: for the sons of Abiezer,  for the sons of Helek,  for the sons of Asriel,  for the sons of Shechem,  for the sons of Hepher,  for the sons of Shemida. These were the male children of Manasseh the son of Joseph according to their families.
Josh. But Zelophehad, the son of Hepher, the son of Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh, had no sons,  daughters. And these are the names of his daughters: Mahlah,  Noah, Hoglah, Milcah,  Tirzah.
Josh. And they came near before Eleazar the priest,  before Joshua the son of Nun,  before the rulers, saying, Jehovah commanded Moses to give us an inheritance among our brothers. Therefore according to the commandment of Jehovah he gave them an inheritance among the brothers of their father.
Josh. And there fell ten parts to Manasseh, besides the land of Gilead and Bashan, which is beyond the Jordan,
Josh. because the daughters of Manasseh had an inheritance among his sons. And the land of Gilead belonged to the rest of the sons of Manasseh.
Josh. And the border of Manasseh was from Asher to Michmethath, which is before Shechem. And the border went along to the right hand, to the inhabitants of En-tappuah.
Josh. The land of Tappuah belonged to Manasseh,  Tappuah on the border of Manasseh belonged to the sons of Ephraim.
Josh. And the border went down to the brook of Kanah, southward of the brook. These cities belonged to Ephraim among the cities of Manasseh. And the border of Manasseh was on the north side of the brook. And the goings out of it were at the sea.
Josh. Southward it was Ephraim's,  northward it was Manasseh's,  the sea was his border,  they reached to Asher on the north,  to Issachar on the east.
Josh. And Manasseh had in Issachar and in Asher, Beth-shean and its towns,  Ibleam and its towns,  the inhabitants of Dor and its towns,  the inhabitants of Endor and its towns,  the inhabitants of Taanach and its towns,  the inhabitants of Megiddo and its towns, even the three heights.
Josh. Yet the sons of Manasseh could not drive out those cities,  the Canaanites would dwell in that land.
Josh. And it came to pass, when the sons of Israel grew strong, that they put the Canaanites to task work,  did not utterly drive them out.
Josh. And the sons of Joseph spoke to Joshua, saying, Why have thou given me but one lot and one part for an inheritance, seeing I am a great people, inasmuch as until now Jehovah has blessed me?
Josh. And Joshua said to them, If thou be a great people, get thee up to the forest,  cut down for thyself there in the land of the Perizzites and of the Rephaim, since the hill-country of Ephraim is too narrow for thee.
Josh. And the sons of Joseph said, The hill-country is not enough for us,  all the Canaanites who dwell in the land of the valley have chariots of iron, both those who are in Beth-shean and its towns,  those who are in the valley of Jezreel.
Josh. And Joshua spoke to the house of Joseph, even to Ephraim and to Manasseh, saying, Thou are a great people,  have great power. Thou shall not have only one lot,
Josh. but the hill-country shall be thine, for though it is a forest, thou shall cut it down,  the goings out of it shall be thine. For thou shall drive out the Canaanites, though they have chariots of iron,  though they are strong.
Josh. And the whole congregation of the sons of Israel assembled themselves together at Shiloh,  set up the tent of meeting there,  the land was subdued before them.
Josh. And seven tribes remained among the sons of Israel, which had not yet divided their inheritance.
Josh. And Joshua said to the sons of Israel, How long are ye slack to go in to possess the land, which Jehovah, the God of your fathers, has given you?
Josh. Appoint for you three men of each tribe. And I will send them,  they shall arise,  walk through the land,  describe it according to their inheritance,  they shall come to me.
Josh. And they shall divide it into seven portions: Judah shall abide in his border on the south,  the house of Joseph shall abide in their border on the north.
Josh. And ye shall describe the land into seven portions,  bring it here to me. And I will cast lots for you here before Jehovah our God.
Josh. For the Levites have no portion among you, for the priesthood of Jehovah is their inheritance,  Gad and Reuben and the half-tribe of Manasseh have received their inheritance beyond the Jordan eastward, which Moses the servant of Jehovah gave them.
Josh. And the men arose,  went. And Joshua charged those who went to describe the land, saying, Go and walk through the land,  describe it,  come again to me. And I will cast lots for you here before Jehovah in Shiloh.
Josh. And the men went and passed through the land,  described it by cities into seven portions in a book. And they came to Joshua to the camp at Shiloh.
Josh. And Joshua cast lots for them in Shiloh before Jehovah. And there Joshua divided the land to the sons of Israel according to their divisions.
Josh. And the lot of the tribe of the sons of Benjamin came up according to their families,  the border of their lot went out between the sons of Judah and the sons of Joseph.
Josh. And their border on the north quarter was from the Jordan,  the border went up to the side of Jericho on the north,  went up through the hill-country westward. And the goings out of it were at the wilderness of Beth-aven.
Josh. And the border passed along from there to Luz, to the side of Luz (the same is Bethel), southward,  the border went down to Ataroth-addar, by the mountain that lies on the south of Beth-horon the nether.
Josh. And the border extended,  turned around on the west quarter southward, from the mountain that lies before Beth-horon southward. And the goings out of it were at Kiriath-baal (the same is Kiriath-jearim), a city of the sons of Judah. This was the west quarter.
Josh. And the south quarter was from the uttermost part of Kiriath-jearim,  the border went out westward,  went out to the fountain of the waters of Nephtoah,
Josh. and the border went down to the uttermost part of the mountain that lies before the valley of the son of Hinnom, which is in the vale of Rephaim northward,  it went down to the valley of Hinnom, to the side of the Jebusite southward,  went down to En-rogel,
Josh. and it extended northward,  went out at En-shemesh,  went out to Geliloth, which is opposite the ascent of Adummim,  it went down to the stone of Bohan the son of Reuben,
Josh. and it passed along to the side opposite the Arabah northward,  went down to the Arabah,
Josh. and the border passed along to the side of Beth-hoglah northward. And the goings out of the border were at the north bay of the Salt Sea, at the south end of the Jordan. This was the south border.
Josh. And the Jordan was the border of it on the east quarter. This was the inheritance of the sons of Benjamin, by the borders of it round about, according to their families.
Josh. Now the cities of the tribe of the sons of Benjamin according to their families were: Jericho,  Beth-hoglah,  Emek-keziz,
Josh. and Beth-arabah,  Zemaraim,  Bethel,
Josh. and Avvim,  Parah,  Ophrah,
Josh. and Chephar-ammoni,  Ophni,  Geba; twelve cities with their villages.
Josh. Gibeon,  Ramah,  Beeroth,
Josh. and Mizpeh,  Chephirah,  Mozah,
Josh. and Rekem,  Irpeel,  Taralah,
Josh. and Zelah, Eleph,  the Jebusite (the same is Jerusalem), Gibeath,  Kiriath; fourteen cities with their villages. This is the inheritance of the sons of Benjamin according to their families.
Josh. And the second lot came out for Simeon, even for the tribe of the sons of Simeon according to their families. And their inheritance was in the midst of the inheritance of the sons of Judah.
Josh. And they had for their inheritance Beersheba, or Sheba,  Moladah,
Josh. and Hazar-shual,  Balah,  Ezem,
Josh. and Eltolad,  Bethul,  Hormah,
Josh. and Ziklag,  Beth-marcaboth,  Hazar-susah,
Josh. and Beth-lebaoth,  Sharuhen; thirteen cities with their villages.
Josh. Ain, Rimmon,  Ether,  Ashan; four cities with their villages;
Josh. and all the villages that were round about these cities to Baalath-beer, Ramah of the South. This is the inheritance of the tribe of the sons of Simeon according to their families.
Josh. The inheritance of the sons of Simeon was out of the part of the sons of Judah, for the portion of the sons of Judah was too much for them. Therefore the sons of Simeon had inheritance in the midst of their inheritance.
Josh. And the third lot came up for the sons of Zebulun according to their families. And the border of their inheritance was to Sarid,
Josh. and their border went up westward, even to Maralah,  reached to Dabbesheth,  it reached to the brook that is before Jokneam,
Josh. and it turned from Sarid eastward toward the sunrising to the border of Chisloth-tabor,  it went out to Daberath,  went up to Japhia.
Josh. And from there it passed along eastward to Gath-hepher, to Eth-kazin,  it went out at Rimmon which stretches to Neah,
Josh. and the border turned about it on the north to Hannathon. And the goings out of it were at the valley of Iph-tah-el,
Josh. and Kattath,  Nahalal,  Shimron,  Idalah,  Bethlehem; twelve cities with their villages.
Josh. This is the inheritance of the sons of Zebulun according to their families, these cities with their villages.
Josh. The fourth lot came out for Issachar, even for the sons of Issachar according to their families.
Josh. And their border was to Jezreel,  Chesulloth,  Shunem,
Josh. and Hapharaim,  Shion,  Anaharath,
Josh. and Rabbith,  Kishion,  Ebez,
Josh. and Remeth,  Engannim,  En-haddah,  Beth-pazzez,
Josh. and the border reached to Tabor,  Shahazumah,  Beth-shemesh. And the goings out of their border were at the Jordan; sixteen cities with their villages.
Josh. This is the inheritance of the tribe of the sons of Issachar according to their families, the cities with their villages.
Josh. And the fifth lot came out for the tribe of the sons of Asher according to their families.
Josh. And their border was Helkath,  Hali,  Beten,  Achshaph,
Josh. and Allammelech,  Amad,  Mishal,  it reached to Carmel westward,  to Shihor-libnath,
Josh. and it turned toward the sunrising to Beth-dagon,  reached to Zebulun,  to the valley of Iph-tah-el northward to Beth-emek and Neiel,  it went out to Cabul on the left hand,
Josh. and Ebron,  Rehob,  Hammon,  Kanah, even to great Sidon,
Josh. and the border turned to Ramah,  to the fortified city of Tyre,  the border turned to Hosah. And the goings out of it were at the sea by the region of Achzib,
Josh. also Ummah,  Aphek,  Rehob; twenty-two cities with their villages.
Josh. This is the inheritance of the tribe of the sons of Asher according to their families, these cities with their villages.
Josh. The sixth lot came out for the sons of Naphtali, even for the sons of Naphtali according to their families.
Josh. And their border was from Heleph, from the oak in Zaanannim,  Adam-inekeb,  Jabneel, to Lakkum. And the goings out of it were at the Jordan.
Josh. And the border turned westward to Aznoth-tabor,  went out from there to Hukkok,  it reached to Zebulun on the south,  reached to Asher on the west,  to Judah at the Jordan toward the sunrising.
Josh. And the fortified cities were Ziddim, Zer,  Hammath, Rakkath,  Chinnereth,
Josh. and Adamah,  Ramah,  Hazor,
Josh. and Kedesh,  Edrei,  En-hazor,
Josh. and Iron,  Migdal-el, Horem,  Beth-anath,  Beth-shemesh; nineteen cities with their villages.
Josh. This is the inheritance of the tribe of the sons of Naphtali according to their families, the cities with their villages.
Josh. The seventh lot came out for the tribe of the sons of Dan according to their families.
Josh. And the border of their inheritance was Zorah,  Eshtaol,  Ir-shemesh,
Josh. and Shaalabbin,  Aijalon,  Ithlah,
Josh. and Elon,  Timnah,  Ekron,
Josh. and Eltekeh,  Gibbethon,  Baalath,
Josh. and Jehud,  Bene-berak,  Gath-rimmon,
Josh. and Me-jarkon,  Rakkon, with the border opposite Joppa.
Josh. And the border of the sons of Dan went out beyond them, for the sons of Dan went up and fought against Leshem,  took it,  smote it with the edge of the sword,  possessed it,  dwelt in it,  called Leshem, Dan, after the name of Dan their father.
Josh. This is the inheritance of the tribe of the sons of Dan according to their families, these cities with their villages.
Josh. So they made an end of distributing the land for inheritance by the borders of it. And the sons of Israel gave an inheritance to Joshua the son of Nun in the midst of them.
Josh. According to the commandment of Jehovah they gave him the city which he asked, even Timnath-serah in the hill-country of Ephraim. And he built the city,  dwelt in it.
Josh. These are the inheritances, which Eleazar the priest,  Joshua the son of Nun,  the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the sons of Israel, distributed for inheritance by lot in Shiloh before Jehovah, at the door of the tent of meeting. So they made an end of dividing the land.
Josh. And Jehovah spoke to Joshua, saying,
Josh. Speak to the sons of Israel, saying, Assign for you the cities of refuge, of which I spoke to you by Moses,
Josh. that the manslayer who kills any soul unwittingly and unawares may flee there. And they shall be to you for a refuge from the avenger of blood.
Josh. And he shall flee to one of those cities,  shall stand at the entrance of the gate of the city,  declare his case in the ears of the elders of that city. And they shall take him into the city to them,  give him a place, that he may dwell among them.
Josh. And if the avenger of blood pursues after him, then they shall not deliver up the manslayer into his hand, because he smote his neighbor unawares,  did not hate him formerly.
Josh. And he shall dwell in that city, until he stands before the congregation for judgment, until the death of the high priest who shall be in those days. Then the manslayer shall return,  come to his own city,  to his own house, to the city from where he fled.
Josh. And they set apart Kedesh in Galilee in the hill-country of Naphtali,  Shechem in the hill-country of Ephraim,  Kiriath-arba (the same is Hebron) in the hill-country of Judah.
Josh. And beyond the Jordan at Jericho eastward, they assigned Bezer in the wilderness in the plain out of the tribe of Reuben,  Ramoth in Gilead out of the tribe of Gad,  Golan in Bashan out of the tribe of Manasseh.
Josh. These were the appointed cities for all the sons of Israel,  for the stranger who sojourns among them, that whoever kills any soul unwittingly might flee there,  not die by the hand of the avenger of blood until he stood before the congregation.
Josh. Then the heads of fathers of the Levites came near to Eleazar the priest,  to Joshua the son of Nun,  to the heads of fathers of the tribes of the sons of Israel.
Josh. And they spoke to them at Shiloh in the land of Canaan, saying, Jehovah commanded Moses to give us cities to dwell in, with the suburbs of it for our cattle.
Josh. And the sons of Israel gave to the Levites out of their inheritance, according to the commandment of Jehovah, these cities with their suburbs:
Josh. And the lot came out for the families of the Kohathites. And the sons of Aaron the priest, who were of the Levites, had by lot out of the tribe of Judah,  out of the tribe of the Simeonites,  out of the tribe of Benjamin, thirteen cities.
Josh. And the rest of the sons of Kohath had by lot out of the families of the tribe of Ephraim,  out of the tribe of Dan,  out of the half-tribe of Manasseh, ten cities.
Josh. And the sons of Gershon had by lot out of the families of the tribe of Issachar,  out of the tribe of Asher,  out of the tribe of Naphtali,  out of the half-tribe of Manasseh in Bashan, thirteen cities.
Josh. The sons of Merari according to their families had out of the tribe of Reuben,  out of the tribe of Gad,  out of the tribe of Zebulun, twelve cities.
Josh. And the sons of Israel gave these cities by lot to the Levites with their suburbs, as Jehovah commanded by Moses.
Josh. And they gave out of the tribe of the sons of Judah,  out of the tribe of the sons of Simeon, these cities which are here mentioned by name,
Josh. and they were for the sons of Aaron, of the families of the Kohathites, who were of the sons of Levi, for theirs was the first lot.
Josh. And they gave them Kiriath-arba, Arba was the father of Anak (the same is Hebron), in the hill-country of Judah, with the suburbs of it round about it.
Josh. But the fields of the city,  the villages of it, gave they to Caleb the son of Jephunneh for his possession.
Josh. And to the sons of Aaron the priest they gave Hebron with its suburbs, the city of refuge for the manslayer,  Libnah with its suburbs,
Josh. and Jattir with its suburbs,  Eshtemoa with its suburbs,
Josh. and Holon with its suburbs,  Debir with its suburbs,
Josh. and Ain with its suburbs,  Juttah with its suburbs,  Beth-shemesh with its suburbs; nine cities out of those two tribes.
Josh. And out of the tribe of Benjamin, Gibeon with its suburbs, Geba with its suburbs,
Josh. Anathoth with its suburbs,  Almon with its suburbs; four cities.
Josh. All the cities of the sons of Aaron, the priests, were thirteen cities with their suburbs.
Josh. And the families of the sons of Kohath, the Levites, even the rest of the sons of Kohath, they had the cities of their lot out of the tribe of Ephraim.
Josh. And they gave them Shechem with its suburbs in the hill-country of Ephraim, the city of refuge for the manslayer,  Gezer with its suburbs,
Josh. and Kibzaim with its suburbs,  Beth-horon with its suburbs; four cities.
Josh. And out of the tribe of Dan, Elteke with its suburbs, Gibbethon with its suburbs,
Josh. Aijalon with its suburbs, Gath-rimmon with its suburbs; four cities.
Josh. And out of the half-tribe of Manasseh, Taanach with its suburbs,  Gath-rimmon with its suburbs; two cities.
Josh. All the cities of the families of the rest of the sons of Kohath were ten with their suburbs.
Josh. And to the sons of Gershon, of the families of the Levites, out of the half-tribe of Manasseh they gave Golan in Bashan with its suburbs, the city of refuge for the manslayer,  Be-eshterah with its suburbs; two cities.
Josh. And out of the tribe of Issachar, Kishion with its suburbs, Daberath with its suburbs,
Josh. Jarmuth with its suburbs, En-gannim with its suburbs; four cities.
Josh. And out of the tribe of Asher, Mishal with its suburbs, Abdon with its suburbs,
Josh. Helkath with its suburbs,  Rehob with its suburbs; four cities.
Josh. And out of the tribe of Naphtali, Kedesh in Galilee with its suburbs, the city of refuge for the manslayer,  Hammoth-dor with its suburbs,  Kartan with its suburbs; three cities.
Josh. All the cities of the Gershonites according to their families were thirteen cities with their suburbs.
Josh. And to the families of the sons of Merari, the rest of the Levites, out of the tribe of Zebulun, Jokneam with its suburbs,  Kartah with its suburbs,
Josh. Dimnah with its suburbs, Nahalal with its suburbs; four cities.
Josh. And out of the tribe of Reuben, Bezer with its suburbs,  Jahaz with its suburbs,
Josh. Kedemoth with its suburbs,  Mephaath with its suburbs; four cities.
Josh. And out of the tribe of Gad, Ramoth in Gilead with its suburbs, the city of refuge for the manslayer,  Mahanaim with its suburbs,
Josh. Heshbon with its suburbs, Jazer with its suburbs; four cities in all.
Josh. All these were the cities of the sons of Merari according to their families, even the rest of the families of the Levites; and their lot was twelve cities.
Josh. All the cities of the Levites in the midst of the possession of the sons of Israel were forty-eight cities with their suburbs.
Josh. These cities were every one with their suburbs round about them. Thus it was with all these cities.
Josh. So Jehovah gave to Israel all the land which he swore to give to their fathers,  they possessed it,  dwelt in it.
Josh. And Jehovah gave them rest round about, according to all that he swore to their fathers. And there stood not a man of all their enemies before them. Jehovah delivered all their enemies into their hand.
Josh. There failed not anything of any good thing which Jehovah had spoken to the house of Israel; all came to pass.
Josh. Then Joshua called the Reubenites,  the Gadites,  the half-tribe of Manasseh,
Josh. and said to them, Ye have kept all that Moses the servant of Jehovah commanded you,  have hearkened to my voice in all that I commanded you.
Josh. Ye have not left your brothers these many days to this day,  have kept the charge of the commandment of Jehovah your God.
Josh. And now Jehovah your God has given rest to your brothers, as he spoke to them. Therefore now turn ye,  get you to your tents, to the land of your possession, which Moses the servant of Jehovah gave you beyond the Jordan.
Josh. Only take diligent heed to do the commandment and the law which Moses the servant of Jehovah commanded you, to love Jehovah your God,  to walk in all his ways,  to keep his commandments,  to cling to him,  to serve him with all your heart and with all your soul.
Josh. So Joshua blessed them,  sent them away,  they went to their tents.
Josh. Now to the one half-tribe of Manasseh Moses had given in Bashan,  to the other half Joshua gave among their brothers beyond the Jordan westward. Moreover when Joshua sent them away to their tents, he blessed them,
Josh. and spoke to them, saying, Return with much wealth to your tents,  with very much cattle, with silver,  with gold,  with brass,  with iron,  with very much raiment. Divide the spoil of your enemies with your brothers.
Josh. And the sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh returned,  departed from the sons of Israel out of Shiloh, which is in the land of Canaan, to go to the land of Gilead, to the land of their possession, of which they were possessed, according to the commandment of Jehovah by Moses.
Josh. And when they came to the region about the Jordan that is in the land of Canaan, the sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh built there an altar by the Jordan, a great altar to look upon.
Josh. And the sons of Israel heard say, Behold, the sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh have built an altar in the forefront of the land of Canaan, in the region about the Jordan, on the side that pertains to the sons of Israel.
Josh. And when the sons of Israel heard of it, the whole congregation of the sons of Israel gathered themselves together at Shiloh, to go up against them to war.
Josh. And the sons of Israel sent Phinehas, the son of Eleazar the priest, to the sons of Reuben,  to the sons of Gad,  to the half-tribe of Manasseh, into the land of Gilead,
Josh. and with him ten rulers, one ruler of a fathers' house for each of the tribes of Israel. And they were each man of them head of their fathers' houses among the thousands of Israel.
Josh. And they came to the sons of Reuben,  to the sons of Gad,  to the half-tribe of Manasseh, to the land of Gilead,  they spoke with them, saying,
Josh. Thus says the whole congregation of Jehovah, What trespass is this that ye have committed against the God of Israel, to turn away this day from following Jehovah, in that ye have built for you an altar, to rebel this day against Jehovah?
Josh. Is the iniquity of Peor too little for us, from which we have not cleansed ourselves to this day, although there came a plague upon the congregation of Jehovah,
Josh. that ye must turn away this day from following Jehovah? And it will be, seeing ye rebel today against Jehovah, that tomorrow he will be angry with the whole congregation of Israel.
Josh. However, if the land of your possession is unclean, then pass ye over to the land of the possession of Jehovah, in which Jehovah's tabernacle dwells,  take possession among us,  do not rebel against Jehovah, nor rebel against us, in building for you an altar besides the altar of Jehovah our God.
Josh. Did not Achan the son of Zerah commit a trespass in what was set apart,  wrath fell upon all the congregation of Israel? And that man did not perish alone in his iniquity.
Josh. Then the sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh answered,  spoke to the heads of the thousands of Israel,
Josh. The Mighty One, God, Jehovah, the Mighty One, God, Jehovah, he knows,  Israel he shall know, if it is in rebellion, or if in trespass against Jehovah (do not save us this day),
Josh. that we have built us an altar to turn away from following Jehovah, or if to offer burnt offering or meal offering on it, or if to offer sacrifices of peace offerings on it, let Jehovah himself require it,
Josh. and if we have not rather out of carefulness done this, from purpose, saying, In time to come your sons might speak to our sons, saying, What have ye to do with Jehovah, the God of Israel?
Josh. For Jehovah has made the Jordan a border between us and you, ye sons of Reuben and sons of Gad. Ye have no portion in Jehovah. So your sons might make our sons cease from fearing Jehovah.
Josh. Therefore we said, Let us now prepare to build us an altar, not for burnt offering, nor for sacrifice,
Josh. but it shall be a witness between us and you,  between our generations after us, that we may do the service of Jehovah before him with our burnt offerings,  with our sacrifices,  with our peace offerings, that your sons may not say to our sons in time to come, Ye have no portion in Jehovah.
Josh. Therefore we said, It shall be, when they so say to us or to our generations in time to come, that we shall say, Behold the pattern of the altar of Jehovah, which our fathers made, not for burnt offering, nor for sacrifice,  it is a witness between us and you.
Josh. Far be it from us that we should rebel against Jehovah,  turn away this day from following Jehovah, to build an altar for burnt offering, for meal offering, or for sacrifice, besides the altar of Jehovah our God that is before his tabernacle.
Josh. And when Phinehas the priest,  the rulers of the congregation, even the heads of the thousands of Israel that were with him, heard the words that the sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad and the sons of Manasseh spoke, it pleased them well.
Josh. And Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest said to the sons of Reuben,  to the sons of Gad,  to the sons of Manasseh, This day we know that Jehovah is in the midst of us, because ye have not committed this trespass against Jehovah. Now ye have delivered the sons of Israel out of the hand of Jehovah.
Josh. And Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest,  the rulers, returned from the sons of Reuben,  from the sons of Gad, out of the land of Gilead, to the land of Canaan, to the sons of Israel,  brought them word again.
Josh. And the thing pleased the sons of Israel. And the sons of Israel blessed God,  spoke no more of going up against them to war, to destroy the land in which the sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad dwelt.
Josh. And the sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad called the altar Witness. For, they said, it is a witness between us that Jehovah is God.
Josh. And it came to pass after many days, when Jehovah had given rest to Israel from all their enemies round about,  Joshua was old and well stricken in years,
Josh. that Joshua called for all Israel, for their elders,  for their heads,  for their judges,  for their officers,  said to them, I am old and well stricken in years,
Josh. and ye have seen all that Jehovah your God has done to all these nations because of you, for Jehovah your God, he it is who has fought for you.
Josh. Behold, I have allotted to you these nations that remain, to be an inheritance for your tribes, from the Jordan, with all the nations that I have cut off, even to the great sea toward the going down of the sun.
Josh. And Jehovah your God, he will thrust them out from before you,  drive them from out of your sight. And ye shall possess their land, as Jehovah your God spoke to you.
Josh. Therefore be ye very courageous to keep and to do all that is written in the book of the law of Moses, that ye not turn aside therefrom to the right hand or to the left;
Josh. that ye do not come among these nations, these that remain among you, neither make mention of the name of their gods, nor cause to swear by them, neither serve them, nor bow yourselves down to them,
Josh. but cling to Jehovah your God as ye have done to this day.
Josh. For Jehovah has driven out from before you great nations and strong. But as for you, no man has stood before you to this day.
Josh. One man of you shall chase a thousand, for Jehovah your God, he it is who fights for you, as he spoke to you.
Josh. Take good heed therefore to yourselves, that ye love Jehovah your God.
Josh. Else if ye do at all go back,  cling to the remnant of these nations, even these that remain among you,  make marriages with them,  go in to them,  they to you,
Josh. know for a certainty that Jehovah your God will no more drive these nations from out of your sight,  they shall be a snare and a trap to you,  a scourge in your sides,  thorns in your eyes, until ye perish from off this good land which Jehovah your God has given you.
Josh. And, behold, this day I am going the way of all the earth. And ye know in all your hearts and in all your souls, that not one thing has failed of all the good things which Jehovah your God spoke concerning you. All have come to pass to you; not one thing has failed of it.
Josh. And it shall come to pass, that as all the good things have come upon you of which Jehovah your God spoke to you, so will Jehovah bring upon you all the evil things, until he has destroyed you from off this good land which Jehovah your God has given you.
Josh. When ye transgress the covenant of Jehovah your God, which he commanded you,  go and serve other gods,  bow down yourselves to them, then the anger of Jehovah will be kindled against you,  ye shall perish quickly from off the good land which he has given to you.
Josh. And Joshua gathered all the tribes of Israel to Shechem,  called for the elders of Israel,  for their heads,  for their judges,  for their officers; and they presented themselves before God.
Josh. And Joshua said to all the people, Thus says Jehovah, the God of Israel: Your fathers dwelt of old time beyond the River, even Terah, the father of Abraham,  the father of Nahor,  they served other gods.
Josh. And I took your father Abraham from beyond the River,  led him throughout all the land of Canaan,  multiplied his seed,  gave him Isaac.
Josh. And I gave to Isaac, Jacob and Esau. And I gave to Esau mount Seir to possess it. And Jacob and his sons went down into Egypt.
Josh. And I sent Moses and Aaron,  I plagued Egypt, according to that which I did in the midst of it,  afterward I brought you out.
Josh. And I brought your fathers out of Egypt. And ye came to the sea,  the Egyptians pursued after your fathers with chariots and with horsemen to the Red Sea.
Josh. And when they cried out to Jehovah, he put darkness between you and the Egyptians,  brought the sea upon them,  covered them. And your eyes saw what I did in Egypt,  ye dwelt in the wilderness many days.
Josh. And I brought you into the land of the Amorites, who dwelt beyond the Jordan. And they fought with you. And I gave them into your hand,  ye possessed their land,  I destroyed them from before you.
Josh. Then Balak the son of Zippor, king of Moab, arose and fought against Israel. And he sent and called Balaam the son of Beor to curse you,
Josh. but I would not hearken to Balaam. Therefore he blessed you greatly. So I delivered you out of his hand.
Josh. And ye went over the Jordan,  came to Jericho. And the men of Jericho fought against you, the Amorite,  the Perizzite,  the Canaanite,  the Hittite,  the Girgashite, the Hivite,  the Jebusite. And I delivered them into your hand.
Josh. And I sent the hornet before you, which drove them out from before you, even the two kings of the Amorites, not with thy sword, nor with thy bow.
Josh. And I gave you a land in which thou had not labored,  cities which ye did not build,  ye dwell in it. Ye eat of vineyards and oliveyards which ye did not plant.
Josh. Now therefore fear Jehovah,  serve him in sincerity and in truth. And put away the gods which your fathers served beyond the River,  in Egypt,  serve ye Jehovah.
Josh. And if it seems evil to you to serve Jehovah, choose you this day whom ye will serve: whether the gods which your fathers served that were beyond the River, or the gods of the Amorites, in whose land ye dwell. But as for me and my house, we will serve Jehovah.
Josh. And the people answered and said, Far be it from us that we should forsake Jehovah, to serve other gods.
Josh. For Jehovah our God, he it is who brought us and our fathers up out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage,  who did those great signs in our sight,  preserved us in all the way in which we went,  among all the peoples through the midst of whom we passed.
Josh. And Jehovah drove out from before us all the peoples, even the Amorites who dwelt in the land. Therefore we also will serve Jehovah, for he is our God.
Josh. And Joshua said to the people, Ye cannot serve Jehovah, for he is a holy God. He is a jealous God. He will not forgive your transgression nor your sins.
Josh. If ye forsake Jehovah,  serve foreign gods, then he will turn and do you evil,  consume you, after he has done you good.
Josh. And the people said to Joshua, No,  we will serve Jehovah.
Josh. And Joshua said to the people, Ye are witnesses against yourselves that ye have chosen for you, Jehovah, to serve him. And they said, We are witnesses.
Josh. Now therefore, he said, put away the foreign gods which are among you,  incline your heart to Jehovah, the God of Israel.
Josh. And the people said to Joshua, we will serve Jehovah our God,  we will hearken to his voice.
Josh. So Joshua made a covenant with the people that day,  set them a statute and an ordinance in Shechem.
Josh. And Joshua wrote these words in the book of the law of God. And he took a great stone,  set it up there under the oak that was by the sanctuary of Jehovah.
Josh. And Joshua said to all the people, Behold, this stone shall be a witness against us, for it has heard all the words of Jehovah which he spoke to us. It shall be therefore a witness against you, lest ye deny your God.
Josh. So Joshua sent the people away, every man to his inheritance.
Josh. And it came to pass after these things, that Joshua the son of Nun, the servant of Jehovah, died, being a hundred and ten years old.
Josh. And they buried him in the border of his inheritance in Timnathserah, which is in the hill-country of Ephraim, on the north of the mountain of Gaash.
Josh. And Israel served Jehovah all the days of Joshua,  all the days of the elders who outlived Joshua,  had known all the work of Jehovah that he had wrought for Israel.
Josh. And they buried the bones of Joseph, which the sons of Israel brought up out of Egypt, in Sicima, in the portion of the land which Jacob bought from the Amorites who dwelt in Sicima for a hundred ewe-lambs. And he gave it to Joseph for a portion.
Josh. And Eleazar the son of Aaron died. And they buried him in the hill of Phinehas his son, which was given him in the hill-country of Ephraim.
Judges
Judg. And it came to pass after the death of Joshua, that the sons of Israel asked of Jehovah, saying, Who shall go up for us first against the Canaanites, to fight against them?
Judg. And Jehovah said, Judah shall go up. Behold, I have delivered the land into his hand.
Judg. And Judah said to Simeon his brother, Come up with me into my lot, that we may fight against the Canaanites,  I likewise will go with thee into thy lot. So Simeon went with him.
Judg. And Judah went up,  Jehovah delivered the Canaanites and the Perizzites into their hand,  they smote of them in Bezek ten thousand men.
Judg. And they found Adoni-bezek in Bezek,  they fought against him,  they smote the Canaanites and the Perizzites.
Judg. But Adoni-bezek fled,  they pursued after him,  caught him,  cut off his thumbs and his great toes.
Judg. And Adoni-bezek said, Seventy kings, having their thumbs and their great toes cut off, gathered scraps under my table. As I have done, so God has requited me. And they brought him to Jerusalem,  he died there.
Judg. And the sons of Judah fought against Jerusalem,  took it,  smote it with the edge of the sword,  set the city on fire.
Judg. And afterward the sons of Judah went down to fight against the Canaanites who dwelt in the hill-country,  in the South,  in the lowland.
Judg. And Judah went against the Canaanites who dwelt in Hebron (now the name of Hebron was formerly Kiriath-arba),  they smote Sheshai,  Ahiman,  Talmai.
Judg. And from there he went against the inhabitants of Debir. (Now the name of Debir was formerly Kiriath-sepher.)
Judg. And Caleb said, He who smites Kiriath-sepher,  takes it, I will give to him Achsah my daughter to wife.
Judg. And Othniel the son of Kenaz, Caleb's younger brother, took it,  he gave him Achsah his daughter to wife.
Judg. And it came to pass, when she came to him, that she moved him to ask of her father a field. And she alighted from off her donkey,  Caleb said to her, What would thou?
Judg. And she said to him, Give me a blessing, since thou have set me in the land of the South, give me also springs of water. And Caleb gave her the upper springs and the nether springs.
Judg. And the sons of the Kenite, Moses' brother-in-law, went up out of the city of palm trees with the sons of Judah into the wilderness of Judah, which is in the south of Arad,  they went and dwelt with the people.
Judg. And Judah went with Simeon his brother,  they smote the Canaanites that inhabited Zephath,  utterly destroyed it. And the name of the city was called Hormah.
Judg. Also Judah took Gaza with the border of it,  Ashkelon with the border of it,  Ekron with the border of it.
Judg. And Jehovah was with Judah,  drove out those of the hill-country. But they could not drive out the inhabitants of the valley because they had chariots of iron.
Judg. And they gave Hebron to Caleb, as Moses had spoken,  he drove out the three sons of Anak from there.
Judg. And the sons of Benjamin did not drive out the Jebusites who inhabited Jerusalem,  the Jebusites dwell with the sons of Benjamin in Jerusalem to this day.
Judg. And the house of Joseph, they also went up against Bethel,  Jehovah was with them.
Judg. And the house of Joseph sent to spy out Bethel. (Now the name of the city was formerly Luz.)
Judg. And the spies saw a man come forth out of the city,  they said to him, Show us, we pray thee, the entrance into the city,  we will deal kindly with thee.
Judg. And he showed them the entrance into the city. And they smote the city with the edge of the sword,  they let the man go and all his family.
Judg. And the man went into the land of the Hittites,  built a city,  called the name of it Luz, which is the name of it to this day.
Judg. And Manasseh did not drive out those of Beth-shean and its towns, nor of Taanach and its towns, nor the inhabitants of Dor and its towns, nor the inhabitants of Ibleam and its towns, nor the inhabitants of Megiddo and its towns,  the Canaanites would dwell in that land.
Judg. And it came to pass, when Israel grew strong, that they put the Canaanites to task work,  did not utterly drive them out.
Judg. And Ephraim did not drive out the Canaanites who dwelt in Gezer,  the Canaanites dwelt in Gezer among them.
Judg. Zebulun did not drive out the inhabitants of Kitron, nor the inhabitants of Nahalol,  the Canaanites dwelt among them,  became subject to task work.
Judg. Asher did not drive out the inhabitants of Acco, nor the inhabitants of Sidon, nor of Ahlab, nor of Achzib, nor of Helbah, nor of Aphik, nor of Rehob,
Judg. but the Asherites dwelt among the Canaanites, the inhabitants of the land, for they did not drive them out.
Judg. Naphtali did not drive out the inhabitants of Beth-shemesh, nor the inhabitants of Beth-anath,  he dwelt among the Canaanites, the inhabitants of the land. Nevertheless the inhabitants of Beth-shemesh and of Beth-anath became subject to task work.
Judg. And the Amorites forced the sons of Dan into the hill-country, for they would not allow them to come down to the valley,
Judg. but the Amorites would dwell in mount Heres, in Aijalon,  in Shaalbim. Yet the hand of the house of Joseph prevailed, so that they became subject to task work.
Judg. And the border of the Amorites was from the ascent of Akrabbim, from the rock,  upward.
Judg. And the agent of Jehovah came up from Gilgal to Bochim. And he said, I made you go up out of Egypt,  have brought you to the land which I swore to your fathers. And I said, I will never break my covenant with you.
Judg. And ye shall make no covenant with the inhabitants of this land. Ye shall break down their altars. But ye have not hearkened to my voice. Why have ye done this?
Judg. Therefore I also said, I will not drive them out from before you,  they shall be as thorns in your sides,  their gods shall be a snare to you.
Judg. And it came to pass, when the agent of Jehovah spoke these words to all the sons of Israel, that the people lifted up their voice,  wept.
Judg. And they called the name of that place Bochim,  they sacrificed there to Jehovah.
Judg. Now when Joshua had sent the people away, the sons of Israel went every man to his inheritance to possess the land.
Judg. And the people served Jehovah all the days of Joshua,  all the days of the elders who outlived Joshua, who had seen all the great work of Jehovah that he had wrought for Israel.
Judg. And Joshua the son of Nun, the servant of Jehovah, died, being a hundred and ten years old.
Judg. And they buried him in the border of his inheritance in Timnath-heres, in the hill-country of Ephraim, on the north of the mountain of Gaash.
Judg. And also all that generation were gathered to their fathers. And there arose another generation after them that did not know Jehovah, nor yet the work which he had wrought for Israel.
Judg. And the sons of Israel did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah,  served the Baalim.
Judg. And they forsook Jehovah, the God of their fathers, who brought them out of the land of Egypt,  followed other gods, of the gods of the peoples that were round about them,  bowed themselves down to them. And they provoked Jehovah to anger.
Judg. And they forsook Jehovah,  served Baal and the Ashtaroth.
Judg. And the anger of Jehovah was kindled against Israel,  he delivered them into the hands of spoilers that despoiled them. And he sold them into the hands of their enemies round about, so that they could not any longer stand before their enemies.
Judg. Wherever they went out, the hand of Jehovah was against them for evil, as Jehovah had spoken,  as Jehovah had sworn to them. And they were exceedingly distressed.
Judg. And Jehovah raised up judges who saved them out of the hand of those who despoiled them.
Judg. And yet they did not hearken to their judges, for they played the harlot after other gods,  bowed themselves down to them. They turned aside quickly out of the way in which their fathers walked, obeying the commandments of Jehovah. They did not do so.
Judg. And when Jehovah raised up judges for them, then Jehovah was with the judge,  saved them out of the hand of their enemies all the days of the judge. For Jehovah regretted because of their groaning because of those who oppressed them and vexed them.
Judg. But it came to pass, when the judge was dead, that they turned back,  dealt more corruptly than their fathers, in following other gods to serve them,  to bow down to them. They did not cease from their doings, nor from their stubborn way.
Judg. And the anger of Jehovah was kindled against Israel,  he said, Because this nation has transgressed my covenant which I commanded their fathers,  has not hearkened to my voice,
Judg. I also will not henceforth drive out any from before them of the nations that Joshua left when he died,
Judg. that by them I may prove Israel, whether they will keep the way of Jehovah to walk in it, as their fathers kept it, or not.
Judg. So Jehovah left those nations, without driving them out quickly. Neither did he deliver them into the hand of Joshua.
Judg. Now these are the nations which Jehovah left to prove Israel by them, (even as many of Israel as had not known all the wars of Canaan,
Judg. only that the generations of the sons of Israel might know, to teach them war, at least to such as formerly knew nothing of that):
Judg. namely, the five lords of the Philistines,  all the Canaanites,  the Sidonians,  the Hivites that dwelt in mount Lebanon, from mount Baal-hermon to the entrance of Hamath.
Judg. And they were left, to prove Israel by them, to know whether they would hearken to the commandments of Jehovah, which he commanded their fathers by Moses.
Judg. And the sons of Israel dwelt among the Canaanites, the Hittites,  the Amorites,  the Perizzites,  the Hivites,  the Jebusites.
Judg. And they took their daughters to be their wives,  gave their own daughters to their sons and served their gods.
Judg. And the sons of Israel did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah,  forgot Jehovah their God,  served the Baalim and the Asheroth.
Judg. Therefore the anger of Jehovah was kindled against Israel,  he sold them into the hand of Cushan-rishathaim king of Mesopotamia, And the sons of Israel served Cushan-rishathaim eight years.
Judg. And when the sons of Israel cried to Jehovah, Jehovah raised up a savior to the sons of Israel, who saved them, even Othniel the son of Kenaz, Caleb's younger brother.
Judg. And the Spirit of Jehovah came upon him,  he judged Israel. And he went out to war,  Jehovah delivered Cushan-rishathaim king of Mesopotamia into his hand,  his hand prevailed against Cushan-rishathaim.
Judg. And the land had rest forty years. And Othniel the son of Kenaz died.
Judg. And the sons of Israel again did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah. And Jehovah strengthened Eglon the king of Moab against Israel because they had done that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah.
Judg. And he gathered to him the sons of Ammon and Amalek,  he went and smote Israel,  they possessed the city of palm trees.
Judg. And the sons of Israel served Eglon the king of Moab eighteen years.
Judg. But when the sons of Israel cried to Jehovah, Jehovah raised up for them a savior, Ehud the son of Gera, the Benjamite, a left-handed man. And the sons of Israel sent tribute by him to Eglon the king of Moab.
Judg. And Ehud made for himself a sword which had two edges, a cubit in length. And he girded it under his raiment upon his right thigh.
Judg. And he offered the tribute to Eglon king of Moab. Now Eglon was a very fat man.
Judg. And when he had made an end of offering the tribute, he sent away the men who bore the tribute.
Judg. But he himself turned back from the quarries that were by Gilgal,  said, I have a secret errand to thee, O king. And he said, Keep silence. And all who stood by him went out from him.
Judg. And Ehud came to him. And he was sitting by himself alone in the cool upper room. And Ehud said, I have a message from God to thee. And he arose out of his seat.
Judg. And Ehud put forth his left hand,  took the sword from his right thigh,  thrust it into his body.
Judg. And the handle also went in after the blade,  the fat closed upon the blade, for he did not draw the sword out of his body,  it came out behind.
Judg. Then Ehud went forth into the porch,  shut the doors of the upper room upon him,  locked them.
Judg. Now when he was gone out, his servants came,  they saw, , behold, the doors of the upper room were locked. And they said, Surely he is covering his feet in the upper chamber.
Judg. And they delayed till they were ashamed, , behold, he did not open the doors of the upper room. Therefore they took the key,  opened, , behold, their lord was fallen down dead on the earth.
Judg. And Ehud escaped while they delayed,  passed beyond the quarries,  escaped to Seirah.
Judg. And it came to pass, when he came, that he blew a trumpet in the hill-country of Ephraim. And the sons of Israel went down with him from the hill-country,  he before them.
Judg. And he said to them, Follow after me, for Jehovah has delivered your enemies the Moabites into your hand. And they went down after him,  took the fords of the Jordan against the Moabites,  did not allow a man to pass over.
Judg. And they smote about ten thousand men of Moab at that time, every robust man,  every man of valor,  there escaped not a man.
Judg. So Moab was subdued that day under the hand of Israel. And the land had rest eighty years.
Judg. And after him was Shamgar the son of Anath, who smote six hundred men of the Philistines with an ox-goad,  he also saved Israel.
Judg. And the sons of Israel again did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah, when Ehud was dead.
Judg. And Jehovah sold them into the hand of Jabin king of Canaan who reigned in Hazor, the captain of whose army was Sisera who dwelt in Harosheth of the Gentiles.
Judg. And the sons of Israel cried to Jehovah, for he had nine hundred chariots of iron,  he mightily oppressed the sons of Israel twenty years.
Judg. Now Deborah, a prophetess, the wife of Lappidoth, she judged Israel at that time.
Judg. And she dwelt under the palm tree of Deborah between Ramah and Bethel in the hill-country of Ephraim,  the sons of Israel came up to her for judgment.
Judg. And she sent and called Barak the son of Abinoam out of Kedesh-naphtali,  said to him, Has not Jehovah, the God of Israel, commanded, saying, Go and approach to mount Tabor,  take with thee ten thousand men of the sons of Naphtali and of the sons of Zebulun?
Judg. And I will draw Sisera, the captain of Jabin's army, to thee, to the river Kishon, with his chariots and his multitude,  I will deliver him into thy hand.
Judg. And Barak said to her, If thou will go with me, then I will go,  if thou will not go with me, I will not go.
Judg. And she said, I will surely go with thee. Notwithstanding, the journey that thou take shall not be for thine honor, for Jehovah will sell Sisera into the hand of a woman. And Deborah arose,  went with Barak to Kedesh.
Judg. And Barak called Zebulun and Naphtali together to Kedesh. And there went up ten thousand men at his feet,  Deborah went up with him.
Judg. Now Heber the Kenite had separated himself from the Kenites, even from the sons of Hobab the brother-in-law of Moses,  had pitched his tent as far as the oak in Zaanannim, which is by Kedesh.
Judg. And they told Sisera that Barak the son of Abinoam was gone up to mount Tabor.
Judg. And Sisera gathered together all his chariots, even nine hundred chariots of iron,  all the people that were with him, from Harosheth of the Gentiles, to the river Kishon.
Judg. And Deborah said to Barak, Up, for this is the day in which Jehovah has delivered Sisera into thy hand. Has not Jehovah gone out before thee? So Barak went down from mount Tabor,  ten thousand men after him.
Judg. And Jehovah discomfited Sisera,  all his chariots,  all his army, with the edge of the sword before Barak. And Sisera alighted from his chariot,  fled away on his feet.
Judg. But Barak pursued after the chariots,  after the army, to Harosheth of the Gentiles. And all the army of Sisera fell by the edge of the sword. There was not a man left.
Judg. However Sisera fled away on his feet to the tent of Jael the wife of Heber the Kenite, for there was peace between Jabin the king of Hazor and the house of Heber the Kenite.
Judg. And Jael went out to meet Sisera,  said to him, Turn in, my lord, turn in to me; fear not. And he turned in to her into the tent,  she covered him with a rug.
Judg. And he said to her, Give me, I pray thee, a little water to drink, for I am thirsty. And she opened a bottle of milk,  gave him drink,  covered him.
Judg. And he said to her, Stand in the door of the tent,  it shall be, when any man comes and inquires of thee,  says, Is there any man here? that thou shall say, No.
Judg. Then Jael Heber's wife took a tent-pin,  took a hammer in her hand,  went softly to him,  struck the pin into his temples,  it pierced through into the ground, for he was in a deep sleep, so he fainted and died.
Judg. And, behold, as Barak pursued Sisera, Jael came out to meet him,  said to him, Come,  I will show thee the man whom thou seek. And he came to her, , behold, Sisera lay dead,  the tent-pin was in his temples.
Judg. So God subdued on that day Jabin the king of Canaan before the sons of Israel.
Judg. And the hand of the sons of Israel prevailed more and more against Jabin the king of Canaan until they had destroyed Jabin king of Canaan.
Judg. Then Deborah and Barak the son of Abinoam sang on that day, saying,
Judg. That the leaders took the lead in Israel, that the people offered themselves willingly, bless ye Jehovah.
Judg. Hear, O ye kings. Give ear, O ye rulers. I, even I, will sing to Jehovah. I will sing praise to Jehovah, the God of Israel.
Judg. Jehovah, when thou went forth out of Seir, when thou marched out of the field of Edom, the earth trembled, the heavens also dropped, yea, the clouds dropped water.
Judg. The mountains quaked at the presence of Jehovah, even yon Sinai at the presence of Jehovah, the God of Israel.
Judg. In the days of Shamgar the son of Anath, in the days of Jael, the highways were unoccupied,  the travelers walked through byways.
Judg. The rulers ceased in Israel, they ceased, until that I, Deborah, arose, that I arose a mother in Israel.
Judg. They chose new gods, then war was in the gates. Was there a shield or spear seen among forty thousand in Israel?
Judg. My heart is toward the governors of Israel, who offered themselves willingly among the people. Bless ye Jehovah.
Judg. Tell, ye who ride on white donkeys, ye who sit on rich carpets,  ye who walk by the way.
Judg. Far from the noise of archers, in the places of drawing water, there they shall rehearse the righteous acts of Jehovah, the righteous acts of his rule in Israel. Then the people of Jehovah went down to the gates.
Judg. Awake, awake, Deborah, awake, awake, utter a song. Arise, Barak,  lead away thy captives, thou son of Abinoam.
Judg. Then a remnant of the nobles and the people came down. Jehovah came down for me against the mighty.
Judg. Out of Ephraim, those whose root is in Amalek, after thee, Benjamin, among thy peoples, out of Machir, came down governors,  out of Zebulun those who handle the marshal's staff.
Judg. And the princes of Issachar were with Deborah, as was Issachar, so was Barak, into the valley they rushed forth at his feet. By the watercourses of Reuben there were great resolves of heart.
Judg. Why did thou sit among the sheepfolds, to hear the pipings for the flocks? At the watercourses of Reuben there were great searchings of heart.
Judg. Gilead abode beyond the Jordan. And Dan, why did he remain in ships? Asher sat still at the haven of the sea,  abode by his creeks.
Judg. Zebulun was a people who jeopardized their lives to the death,  Naphtali, upon the high places of the field.
Judg. The kings came and fought. Then the kings of Canaan fought in Taanach by the waters of Megiddo. They took no gain of money.
Judg. From heaven the stars fought; from their courses they fought against Sisera.
Judg. The river Kishon swept them away, that ancient river, the river Kishon. O my soul, march on with strength.
Judg. Then the horse hoofs stamped by reason of the prancings, the prancings of their strong ones.
Judg. Curse ye Meroz, said the agent of Jehovah. Curse ye bitterly the inhabitants of it, because they did not come to the help of Jehovah, to the help of Jehovah against the mighty.
Judg. Blessed above women shall Jael be, the wife of Heber the Kenite. Blessed shall she be above women in the tent.
Judg. He asked water. She gave him milk. She brought him butter in a lordly dish.
Judg. She put her hand to the tent-pin,  her right hand to the workmen's hammer. And with the hammer she smote Sisera; she struck through his head. Yea, she pierced and struck through his temples.
Judg. At her feet he bowed, he fell, he lay. At her feet he bowed, he fell. Where he bowed, there he fell down dead.
Judg. Through the window she looked forth,  cried-the mother of Sisera through the lattice-Why is his chariot so long in coming? Why do the wheels of his chariots delay?
Judg. Her wise ladies answered her, yea, she returned answer to herself,
Judg. Have they not found, have they not divided the spoil? A damsel, two damsels to every man, to Sisera a spoil of dyed garments, a spoil of dyed garments embroidered, of dyed garments embroidered on both sides, on the necks of the spoil?
Judg. So let all thine enemies perish, O Jehovah,  let those who love him be as the sun when he goes forth in his might. And the land had rest forty years.
Judg. And the sons of Israel did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah,  Jehovah delivered them into the hand of Midian seven years.
Judg. And the hand of Midian prevailed against Israel. And because of Midian the sons of Israel made for themselves the dens which are in the mountains,  the caves,  the strongholds.
Judg. And so it was, when Israel had sown, that the Midianites came up,  the Amalekites,  the sons of the east, they came up against them.
Judg. And they encamped against them,  destroyed the increase of the earth, till thou come to Gaza,  left no sustenance in Israel, neither sheep, nor ox, nor donkey.
Judg. For they came up with their cattle and their tents. They came in as locusts for multitude. Both they and their camels were without number,  they came into the land to destroy it.
Judg. And Israel was brought very low because of Midian,  the sons of Israel cried to Jehovah.
Judg. And it came to pass, when the sons of Israel cried to Jehovah because of Midian,
Judg. that Jehovah sent a prophet to the sons of Israel. And he said to them, Thus says Jehovah, the God of Israel, I brought you up from Egypt,  brought you forth out of the house of bondage.
Judg. And I delivered you out of the hand of the Egyptians,  out of the hand of all that oppressed you,  drove them out from before you,  gave you their land.
Judg. And I said to you, I am Jehovah your God. Ye shall not fear the gods of the Amorites, in whose land ye dwell,  ye have not hearkened to my voice.
Judg. And the agent of Jehovah came,  sat under the oak which was in Ophrah that pertained to Joash the Abiezrite. And his son Gideon was beating out wheat in the winepress, to hide it from the Midianites.
Judg. And the agent of Jehovah appeared to him,  said to him, Jehovah is with thee, thou mighty man of valor.
Judg. And Gideon said to him, Oh, my lord, if Jehovah is with us, then why has all this befallen us? And where are all his wondrous works which our fathers told us of, saying, Did not Jehovah bring us up from Egypt? But now Jehovah has cast us off,  delivered us into the hand of Midian.
Judg. And Jehovah looked upon him,  said, Go in this thy might,  save Israel from the hand of Midian. Have I not sent thee?
Judg. And he said to him, Oh, Lord, with what shall I save Israel? Behold, my family is the poorest in Manasseh,  I am the least in my father's house.
Judg. And Jehovah said to him, Surely I will be with thee,  thou shall smite the Midianites as one man.
Judg. And he said to him, If now I have found favor in thy sight, then show me a sign that it is thou who talk with me.
Judg. Depart not from here, I pray thee, until I come to thee,  bring forth my present,  lay it before thee. And he said, I will tarry until thou come again.
Judg. And Gideon went in,  made ready a kid,  unleavened cakes of an ephah of meal. He put the flesh in a basket,  he put the broth in a pot,  brought it out to him under the oak,  presented it.
Judg. And the agent of God said to him, Take the flesh and the unleavened cakes,  lay them upon this rock,  pour out the broth. And he did so.
Judg. Then the agent of Jehovah put forth the end of the staff that was in his hand,  touched the flesh and the unleavened cakes. And there went up fire out of the rock,  consumed the flesh and the unleavened cakes. And the agent of Jehovah departed out of his sight.
Judg. And Gideon saw that he was the agent of Jehovah. And Gideon said, Alas, O lord Jehovah! Inasmuch as I have seen the agent of Jehovah face to face.
Judg. And Jehovah said to him, Peace be to thee. Fear not; thou shall not die.
Judg. Then Gideon built an altar there to Jehovah,  called it Jehovah-shalom. To this day it is yet in Ophrah of the Abiezrites.
Judg. And it came to pass the same night, that Jehovah said to him, Take thy father's bullock, even the second bullock seven years old,  throw down the altar of Baal that thy father has,  cut down the Asherah that is by it.
Judg. And build an altar to Jehovah thy God upon the top of this stronghold, in the orderly manner,  take the second bullock,  offer a burnt offering with the wood of the Asherah which thou shall cut down.
Judg. Then Gideon took ten men of his servants,  did as Jehovah had spoken to him. And it came to pass, because he feared his father's household and the men of the city, so that he could not do it by day, that he did it by night.
Judg. And when the men of the city arose early in the morning, behold, the altar of Baal was broken down,  the Asherah was cut down that was by it,  the second bullock was offered upon the altar that was built.
Judg. And they said one to another, Who has done this thing? And when they inquired and asked, they said, Gideon the son of Joash has done this thing.
Judg. Then the men of the city said to Joash, Bring out thy son, that he may die, because he has broken down the altar of Baal,  because he has cut down the Asherah that was by it.
Judg. And Joash said to all who stood against him, Will ye contend for Baal? Or will ye save him? He who will contend for him, let him be put to death while it is morning. If he be a god, let him contend for himself because he has broken down his altar.
Judg. Therefore on that day he called him Jerubbaal, saying, Let Baal contend against him because he has broken down his altar.
Judg. Then all the Midianites and the Amalekites and the sons of the east assembled themselves together. And they passed over,  encamped in the valley of Jezreel.
Judg. But the Spirit of Jehovah came upon Gideon,  he blew a trumpet,  Abiezer was gathered together after him.
Judg. And he sent messengers throughout all Manasseh,  they also were gathered together after him. And he sent messengers to Asher,  to Zebulun,  to Naphtali,  they came up to meet them.
Judg. And Gideon said to God, If thou will save Israel by my hand, as thou have spoken,
Judg. behold, I will put a fleece of wool on the threshing-floor. If there be dew on the fleece only,  it be dry upon all the ground, then I shall know that thou will save Israel by my hand as thou have spoken.
Judg. And it was so, for he rose up early on the morrow,  pressed the fleece together,  wrung the dew out of the fleece, a bowlful of water.
Judg. And Gideon said to God, Let not thine anger be kindled against me,  I will speak but this once. Let me make trial, I pray thee,  this once with the fleece. Let it now be dry only upon the fleece,  upon all the ground let there be dew.
Judg. And God did so that night, for it was dry upon the fleece only,  there was dew on all the ground.
Judg. Then Jerubbaal, who is Gideon,  all the people who were with him, rose up early,  encamped beside the spring of Harod. And the camp of Midian was on the north side of them, by the hill of Moreh, in the valley.
Judg. And Jehovah said to Gideon, The people who are with thee are too many for me to give the Midianites into their hand, lest Israel vaunt themselves against me, saying, My own hand has saved me.
Judg. Now therefore proclaim in the ears of the people, saying, Whoever is fearful and trembling, let him return and depart from mount Gilead. And there returned of the people twenty-two thousand,  there remained ten thousand.
Judg. And Jehovah said to Gideon, The people are yet too many. Bring them down to the water,  I will try them for thee there. And it shall be, that of whom I say to thee, This man shall go with thee, the same shall go with thee,  of whomever I say to thee, This man shall not go with thee, the same shall not go.
Judg. So he brought down the people to the water. And Jehovah said to Gideon, Everyone who laps of the water with his tongue, as a dog laps, him thou shall set by himself. Likewise everyone who bows down upon his knees to drink.
Judg. And the number of those who lapped, putting their hand to their mouth, was three hundred men,  all the rest of the people bowed down upon their knees to drink water.
Judg. And Jehovah said to Gideon, By the three hundred men who lapped I will save you,  deliver the Midianites into thy hand. And let all the people go every man to his place.
Judg. So the people took provision in their hand,  their trumpets. And he sent all the men of Israel every man to his tent,  retained the three hundred men. And the camp of Midian was beneath him in the valley.
Judg. And it came to pass the same night, that Jehovah said to him, Arise, get thee down into the camp, for I have delivered it into thy hand.
Judg. But if thou fear to go down, go thou with Purah thy servant down to the camp.
Judg. And thou shall hear what they say,  afterward thy hands shall be strengthened to go down into the camp. Then he went down with Purah his servant to the outermost part of the armed men who were in the camp.
Judg. And the Midianites and the Amalekites and all the sons of the east lay along in the valley like locusts for multitude,  their camels were without number, as the sand which is upon the sea-shore for multitude.
Judg. And when Gideon came, behold, there was a man telling a dream to his fellow. And he said, Behold, I dreamed a dream. And, lo, a cake of barley bread tumbled into the camp of Midian,  came to the tent,  smote it so that it fell,  turned it upside down so that the tent lay flat.
Judg. And his fellow answered and said, This is nothing else except the sword of Gideon the son of Joash, a man of Israel. Into his hand God has delivered Midian,  all the army.
Judg. And it was so, when Gideon heard the telling of the dream,  the interpretation of it, that he worshiped. And he returned into the camp of Israel,  said, Arise, for Jehovah has delivered the army of Midian into your hand.
Judg. And he divided the three hundred men into three companies,  he put trumpets into the hands of all of them,  empty pitchers, with torches inside the pitchers.
Judg. And he said to them, Look on me,  do likewise, , behold, when I come to the outermost part of the camp, it shall be that, as I do, so ye shall do.
Judg. When I blow the trumpet, I and all who are with me, then blow ye the trumpets also on every side of all the camp,  say, For Jehovah and for Gideon.
Judg. So Gideon,  the hundred men who were with him, came to the outermost part of the camp in the beginning of the middle watch when they had but newly set the watch. And they blew the trumpets,  broke in pieces the pitchers that were in their hands.
Judg. And the three companies blew the trumpets,  broke the pitchers,  held the torches in their left hands,  the trumpets in their right hands with which to blow. And they cried out, The sword of Jehovah and of Gideon.
Judg. And they stood every man in his place round about the camp. And all the army ran,  they shouted,  put them to flight.
Judg. And they blew the three hundred trumpets,  Jehovah set every man's sword against his fellow,  against all the army. And the army fled as far as Beth-shittah toward Zererah, as far as the border of Abel-meholah, by Tabbath.
Judg. And the men of Israel were gathered together out of Naphtali,  out of Asher,  out of all Manasseh,  pursued after Midian.
Judg. And Gideon sent messengers throughout all the hill-country of Ephraim, saying, Come down against Midian,  take before them the waters, as far as Beth-barah, even the Jordan. So all the men of Ephraim were gathered together,  took the waters as far as Beth-barah, even the Jordan.
Judg. And they took the two princes of Midian, Oreb and Zeeb. And they killed Oreb at the rock of Oreb,  Zeeb they killed at the winepress of Zeeb,  pursued Midian. And they brought the heads of Oreb and Zeeb to Gideon beyond the Jordan.
Judg. And the men of Ephraim said to him, Why have thou done thus to us, that thou did not call us when thou went to fight with Midian? And they chided with him sharply.
Judg. And he said to them, What have I now done in comparison with you? Is not the gleaning of the grapes of Ephraim better than the vintage of Abiezer?
Judg. God has delivered into your hand the rulers of Midian, Oreb and Zeeb,  what was I able to do in comparison with you? Then their anger was abated toward him when he had said that.
Judg. And Gideon came to the Jordan,  passed over, he,  the three hundred men who were with him, faint, yet pursuing.
Judg. And he said to the men of Succoth, Give, I pray you, loaves of bread to the people who follow me, for they are faint,  I am pursuing after Zebah and Zalmunna, the kings of Midian.
Judg. And the rulers of Succoth said, Are the hands of Zebah and Zalmunna now in thy hand that we should give bread to thine army?
Judg. And Gideon said, Therefore when Jehovah has delivered Zebah and Zalmunna into my hand, then I will tear your flesh with the thorns of the wilderness and with briers.
Judg. And he went up from there to Penuel,  spoke to them in like manner,  the men of Penuel answered him as the men of Succoth had answered.
Judg. And he spoke also to the men of Penuel, saying, When I come again in peace, I will break down this tower.
Judg. Now Zebah and Zalmunna were in Karkor,  their armies with them, about fifteen thousand men, all who were left of all the army of the sons of the east, for there fell a hundred and twenty thousand men who drew a sword.
Judg. And Gideon went up by the way of those who dwelt in tents on the east of Nobah and Jogbehah,  smote the army, for the army was confident.
Judg. And Zebah and Zalmunna fled,  he pursued after them. And he took the two kings of Midian, Zebah and Zalmunna,  discomfited all the army.
Judg. And Gideon the son of Joash returned from the battle from the ascent of Heres.
Judg. And he caught a young man of the men of Succoth,  inquired of him. And he described for him the rulers of Succoth,  the elders of it, seventy-seven men.
Judg. And he came to the men of Succoth,  said, Behold Zebah and Zalmunna, concerning whom ye taunted me, saying, Are the hands of Zebah and Zalmunna now in thy hand, that we should give bread to thy men who are weary?
Judg. And he took the elders of the city,  thorns of the wilderness and briers,  with them he taught the men of Succoth.
Judg. And he broke down the tower of Penuel,  killed the men of the city.
Judg. Then he said to Zebah and Zalmunna, What manner of men were they whom ye killed at Tabor? And they answered, As thou are, so were they. Each one resembled the sons of a king.
Judg. And he said, They were my brothers, the sons of my mother. As Jehovah lives, if ye had saved them alive, I would not kill you.
Judg. And he said to Jether his firstborn, Up,  kill them. But the youth did not draw his sword, for he feared because he was yet a youth.
Judg. Then Zebah and Zalmunna said, Rise thou,  fall upon us, for as the man is, so is his strength. And Gideon arose,  killed Zebah and Zalmunna,  took the crescents that were on their camels' necks.
Judg. Then the men of Israel said to Gideon, Rule thou over us, both thou,  thy son,  thy son's son also, for thou have saved us out of the hand of Midian.
Judg. And Gideon said to them, I will not rule over you, neither shall my son rule over you. Jehovah shall rule over you.
Judg. And Gideon said to them, I would make a request of you, that ye would give me every man the earrings of his spoil. (For they had golden earrings, because they were Ishmaelites.)
Judg. And they answered, We will willingly give them. And they spread a garment,  cast in it every man the earrings of his spoil.
Judg. And the weight of the golden earrings that he requested was a thousand and seven hundred shekels of gold, besides the crescents,  the pendants,  the purple raiment that was on the kings of Midian,  besides the chains that were about their camels' necks.
Judg. And Gideon made an ephod of it,  put it in his city, even in Ophrah. And all Israel played the harlot after it there,  it became a snare to Gideon,  to his house.
Judg. So Midian was subdued before the sons of Israel,  they lifted up their heads no more. And the land had rest forty years in the days of Gideon.
Judg. And Jerubbaal the son of Joash went and dwelt in his own house.
Judg. And Gideon had seventy sons begotten from his body, for he had many wives.
Judg. And his concubine who was in Shechem, she also bore him a son,  he called his name Abimelech.
Judg. And Gideon the son of Joash died in a good old age,  was buried in the sepulcher of Joash his father, in Ophrah of the Abiezrites.
Judg. And it came to pass, as soon as Gideon was dead, that the sons of Israel turned again,  played the harlot after the Baalim,  made Baal-berith their god.
Judg. And the sons of Israel did not remember Jehovah their God, who had delivered them out of the hand of all their enemies on every side,
Judg. neither did they show kindness to the house of Jerubbaal, who is Gideon, according to all the goodness which he had shown to Israel.
Judg. And Abimelech the son of Jerubbaal went to Shechem to his mother's brothers,  spoke with them,  with all the family of the house of his mother's father, saying,
Judg. Speak, I pray you, in the ears of all the men of Shechem, Which is better for you, that all the sons of Jerubbaal, who are seventy men, rule over you, or that one rule over you? Remember also that I am your bone and your flesh.
Judg. And his mother's brothers spoke of him in the ears of all the men of Shechem all these words. And their hearts inclined to follow Abimelech, for they said, He is our brother.
Judg. And they gave him seventy pieces of silver out of the house of Baal-berith, with which Abimelech hired vain and unstable fellows who followed him.
Judg. And he went to his father's house at Ophrah,  killed his brothers the sons of Jerubbaal, being seventy men, upon one stone,  Jotham the youngest son of Jerubbaal was left, for he hid himself.
Judg. And all the men of Shechem assembled themselves together,  all the house of Millo,  went and made Abimelech king by the oak of the pillar that was in Shechem.
Judg. And when they told it to Jotham, he went and stood on the top of mount Gerizim,  lifted up his voice,  cried out,  said to them, Hearken to me, ye men of Shechem, that God may hearken to you.
Judg. The trees went forth a time to anoint a king over them. And they said to the olive tree, Reign thou over us.
Judg. But the olive tree said to them, Should I leave my fatness with which by me they honor God and man,  go to wave to and fro over the trees?
Judg. And the trees said to the fig tree, Come thou,  reign over us.
Judg. But the fig tree said to them, Should I leave my sweetness,  my good fruit,  go to wave to and fro over the trees?
Judg. And the trees said to the vine, Come thou,  reign over us.
Judg. And the vine said to them, Should I leave my new wine, which cheers God and man,  go to wave to and fro over the trees?
Judg. Then all the trees said to the bramble, Come thou,  reign over us.
Judg. And the bramble said to the trees, If in truth ye anoint me king over you, then come and take refuge in my shade,  if not, let fire come out of the bramble,  devour the cedars of Lebanon.
Judg. Now therefore, if ye have dealt truly and uprightly, in that ye have made Abimelech king,  if ye have dealt well with Jerubbaal and his house,  have done to him according to the deed of his hands
Judg. (for my father fought for you,  ventured his life,  delivered you out of the hand of Midian,
Judg. and ye have risen up against my father's house this day,  have slain his sons, seventy men, upon one stone,  have made Abimelech, the son of his maid-servant, king over the men of Shechem because he is your brother),
Judg. if ye then have dealt truly and uprightly with Jerubbaal and with his house this day, then rejoice ye in Abimelech,  let him also rejoice in you.
Judg. But if not, let fire come out from Abimelech,  devour the men of Shechem,  the house of Millo,  let fire come out from the men of Shechem,  from the house of Millo,  devour Abimelech.
Judg. And Jotham ran away,  fled,  went to Beer,  dwelt there, for fear of Abimelech his brother.
Judg. And Abimelech was ruler over Israel three years.
Judg. And God sent an evil spirit between Abimelech and the men of Shechem,  the men of Shechem dealt treacherously with Abimelech,
Judg. that the violence done to the seventy sons of Jerubbaal might come,  that their blood might be laid upon Abimelech their brother who killed them,  upon the men of Shechem who strengthened his hands to kill his brothers.
Judg. And the men of Shechem set ambushes for him on the tops of the mountains,  they robbed all who came along that way by them,  it was told Abimelech.
Judg. And Gaal the son of Ebed came with his brothers,  went over to Shechem,  the men of Shechem put their trust in him.
Judg. And they went out into the field,  gathered their vineyards,  trod the grapes,  held festival,  went into the house of their god,  ate and drank,  cursed Abimelech.
Judg. And Gaal the son of Ebed said, Who is Abimelech,  who is Shechem, that we should serve him? Is not he the son of Jerubbaal,  Zebul his officer? Serve ye the men of Hamor the father of Shechem,  why should we serve him?
Judg. And would that this people were under my hand! Then I would remove Abimelech. And he said to Abimelech, Increase thine army,  come out.
Judg. And when Zebul the ruler of the city heard the words of Gaal the son of Ebed, his anger was kindled.
Judg. And he sent messengers to Abimelech privately, saying, Behold, Gaal the son of Ebed and his brothers have come to Shechem, , behold, they are fortifying the city against thee.
Judg. Now therefore, up by night, thou and the people who are with thee,  lie in wait in the field.
Judg. And it shall be, that in the morning, as soon as the sun is up, thou shall rise early,  rush upon the city, , behold, when he and the people who are with him come out against thee, then thou may do to them as thou shall find occasion.
Judg. And Abimelech rose up,  all the people who were with him, by night,  they laid wait against Shechem in four companies.
Judg. And Gaal the son of Ebed went out,  stood in the entrance of the gate of the city. And Abimelech rose up,  the people who were with him, from the ambushment.
Judg. And when Gaal saw the people, he said to Zebul, Behold, there comes a people down from the tops of the mountains. And Zebul said to him, Thou see the shadow of the mountains as if they were men.
Judg. And Gaal spoke again and said, See, there comes a people down by the middle of the land,  one company comes by the way of the oak of Meonenim.
Judg. Then Zebul said to him, Where is now thy mouth, that thou said, Who is Abimelech, that we should serve him? Is not this the people that thou have despised? Go out now, I pray,  fight with them.
Judg. And Gaal went out before the men of Shechem,  fought with Abimelech.
Judg. And Abimelech chased him,  he fled before him,  there fell many wounded, even to the entrance of the gate.
Judg. And Abimelech dwelt at Arumah,  Zebul drove out Gaal and his brothers, that they should not dwell in Shechem.
Judg. And it came to pass on the morrow, that the people went out into the field,  they told Abimelech.
Judg. And he took the people,  divided them into three companies,  laid wait in the field. And he looked, , behold, the people came forth out of the city. And he rose up against them,  smote them.
Judg. And Abimelech,  the companies who were with him, rushed forward,  stood in the entrance of the gate of the city,  the two companies rushed upon all who were in the field,  smote them.
Judg. And Abimelech fought against the city all that day. And he took the city,  killed the people that were in it,  he beat down the city,  sowed it with salt.
Judg. And when all the men of the tower of Shechem heard of it, they entered into the stronghold of the house of El-berith.
Judg. And it was told Abimelech that all the men of the tower of Shechem were gathered together.
Judg. And Abimelech got up to mount Zalmon, he and all the people who were with him. And Abimelech took an axe in his hand,  cut down a bough from the trees,  took it up,  laid it on his shoulder. And he said to the people who were with him, What ye have seen me do, make haste,  do as I have done.
Judg. And all the people likewise cut down every man his bough,  followed Abimelech,  put them to the stronghold,  set the stronghold on fire upon them, so that all the men of the tower of Shechem died also, about a thousand men and women.
Judg. Then Abimelech went to Thebez,  encamped against Thebez,  took it.
Judg. But there was a strong tower inside the city. And all the men and women fled,  all those of the city,  shut themselves in,  got up to the roof of the tower.
Judg. And Abimelech came to the tower,  fought against it,  drew near to the door of the tower to burn it with fire.
Judg. And a certain woman cast an upper millstone upon Abimelech's head,  broke his skull.
Judg. Then he called hastily to the young man his armor bearer,  said to him, Draw thy sword,  kill me, that men not say of me, A woman killed him. And his young man thrust him through,  he died.
Judg. And when the men of Israel saw that Abimelech was dead, they departed every man to his place.
Judg. Thus God requited the wickedness of Abimelech, which he did to his father, in slaying his seventy brothers.
Judg. And God requited all the wickedness of the men of Shechem upon their heads. And the curse of Jotham the son of Jerubbaal came upon them.
Judg. And after Abimelech there arose Tola the son of Puah, the son of Dodo, a man of Issachar, to save Israel,  he dwelt in Shamir in the hill-country of Ephraim.
Judg. And he judged Israel twenty-three years,  died,  was buried in Shamir.
Judg. And after him arose Jair, the Gileadite,  he judged Israel twenty-two years.
Judg. And he had thirty sons who rode on thirty donkey colts,  they had thirty cities, which are called Havvoth-jair to this day, which are in the land of Gilead.
Judg. And Jair died,  was buried in Kamon.
Judg. And the sons of Israel again did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah,  served the Baalim,  the Ashtaroth,  the gods of Syria,  the gods of Sidon,  the gods of Moab,  the gods of the sons of Ammon,  the gods of the Philistines. And they forsook Jehovah,  did not serve him.
Judg. And the anger of Jehovah was kindled against Israel,  he sold them into the hand of the Philistines,  into the hand of the sons of Ammon.
Judg. And they vexed and oppressed the sons of Israel that year. Eighteen years they oppressed all the sons of Israel who were beyond the Jordan in the land of the Amorites, which is in Gilead.
Judg. And the sons of Ammon passed over the Jordan to also fight against Judah,  against Benjamin,  against the house of Ephraim, so that Israel was exceedingly distressed.
Judg. And the sons of Israel cried to Jehovah, saying, We have sinned against thee, even because we have forsaken our God,  have served the Baalim.
Judg. And Jehovah said to the sons of Israel, Did not I save you from the Egyptians,  from the Amorites, from the sons of Ammon,  from the Philistines?
Judg. The Sidonians also,  the Amalekites,  the Maonites, oppressed you. And ye cried to me,  I saved you out of their hand.
Judg. Yet ye have forsaken me,  served other gods. Therefore I will save you no more.
Judg. Go and cry to the gods which ye have chosen. Let them save you in the time of your distress.
Judg. And the sons of Israel said to Jehovah, We have sinned. Do thou to us whatever seems good to thee, only deliver us, we pray thee, this day.
Judg. And they put away the foreign gods from among them,  served Jehovah. And his soul was grieved for the misery of Israel.
Judg. Then the sons of Ammon were gathered together,  encamped in Gilead. And the sons of Israel assembled themselves together,  encamped in Mizpah.
Judg. And the people, the rulers of Gilead, said one to another, What man is he who will begin to fight against the sons of Ammon? He shall be head over all the inhabitants of Gilead.
Judg. Now Jephthah the Gileadite was a mighty man of valor,  he was the son of a harlot,  Gilead begot Jephthah.
Judg. And Gilead's wife bore sons to him. And when his wife's sons grew up, they drove out Jephthah,  said to him, Thou shall not inherit in our father's house, for thou are the son of another woman.
Judg. Then Jephthah fled from his brothers,  dwelt in the land of Tob. And vain fellows were gathered to Jephthah,  they went out with him.
Judg. And it came to pass after a while, that the sons of Ammon made war against Israel.
Judg. And it was so, that, when the sons of Ammon made war against Israel, the elders of Gilead went to fetch Jephthah out of the land of Tob.
Judg. And they said to Jephthah, Come and be our chief, that we may fight with the sons of Ammon.
Judg. And Jephthah said to the elders of Gilead, Did ye not hate me,  drive me out of my father's house? And why have ye come to me now when ye are in distress?
Judg. And the elders of Gilead said to Jephthah, For that reason we turned again to thee now, that thou may go with us,  fight with the sons of Ammon. And thou shall be our head over all the inhabitants of Gilead.
Judg. And Jephthah said to the elders of Gilead, If ye bring me home again to fight with the sons of Ammon,  Jehovah delivers them before me, shall I be your head?
Judg. And the elders of Gilead said to Jephthah, Jehovah shall be witness between us. Surely according to thy word so will we do.
Judg. Then Jephthah went with the elders of Gilead,  the people made him head and chief over them. And Jephthah spoke all his words before Jehovah in Mizpah.
Judg. And Jephthah sent messengers to the king of the sons of Ammon, saying, What have thou to do with me, that thou have come to me to fight against my land?
Judg. And the king of the sons of Ammon answered to the messengers of Jephthah, Because Israel took away my land when he came up out of Egypt, from the Arnon even to the Jabbok,  to the Jordan. Now therefore restore those lands again peaceably.
Judg. And Jephthah sent messengers again to the king of the sons of Ammon.
Judg. And he said to him, Thus says Jephthah: Israel did not take away the land of Moab, nor the land of the sons of Ammon,
Judg. but when they came up from Egypt,  Israel went through the wilderness to the Red Sea,  came to Kadesh,
Judg. then Israel sent messengers to the king of Edom, saying, Let me, I pray thee, pass through thy land,  the king of Edom did not hearken. And in like manner he sent to the king of Moab,  he would not. And Israel abode in Kadesh.
Judg. Then they went through the wilderness,  went around the land of Edom,  the land of Moab,  came by the east side of the land of Moab. And they encamped on the other side of the Arnon,  they did not come within the border of Moab, for the Arnon was the border of Moab.
Judg. And Israel sent messengers to Sihon king of the Amorites, the king of Heshbon. And Israel said to him, Let us pass, we pray thee, through thy land to my place.
Judg. But Sihon did not trust Israel to pass through his border,  Sihon gathered all his people together,  encamped in Jahaz,  fought against Israel.
Judg. And Jehovah, the God of Israel, delivered Sihon and all his people into the hand of Israel,  they smote them. So Israel possessed all the land of the Amorites, the inhabitants of that country.
Judg. And they possessed all the border of the Amorites, from the Arnon even to the Jabbok,  from the wilderness even to the Jordan.
Judg. So now Jehovah, the God of Israel, has dispossessed the Amorites from before his people Israel,  should thou possess them?
Judg. Will thou not possess that which Chemosh thy god gives thee to possess? So whomever Jehovah our God has dispossessed from before us, them will we possess.
Judg. And now are thou anything better than Balak the son of Zippor, king of Moab? Did he ever strive against Israel, or did he ever fight against them?
Judg. While Israel dwelt in Heshbon and its towns,  in Aroer and its towns,  in all the cities that are along by the side of the Arnon, three hundred years, why did ye not recover them within that time?
Judg. I therefore have not sinned against thee,  thou do me wrong to war against me. Jehovah, the Judge, be judge this day between the sons of Israel and the sons of Ammon.
Judg. However the king of the sons of Ammon did not hearken to the words of Jephthah which he sent him.
Judg. Then the Spirit of Jehovah came upon Jephthah,  he passed over Gilead and Manasseh,  passed over Mizpeh of Gilead,  from Mizpeh of Gilead he passed over to the sons of Ammon.
Judg. And Jephthah vowed a vow to Jehovah,  said, If thou will indeed deliver the sons of Ammon into my hand,
Judg. then it shall be, that whatever comes forth from the doors of my house to meet me, when I return in peace from the sons of Ammon, it shall be Jehovah's,  I will offer it up for a burnt offering.
Judg. So Jephthah passed over to the sons of Ammon to fight against them,  Jehovah delivered them into his hand.
Judg. And he smote them from Aroer until thou come to Minnith, even twenty cities,  to Abelcheramim, with a very great slaughter. So the sons of Ammon were subdued before the sons of Israel.
Judg. And Jephthah came to Mizpah to his house, , behold, his daughter came out to meet him with timbrels and with dances. And she was his only child. Besides her he had neither son nor daughter.
Judg. And it came to pass, when he saw her, that he tore his clothes,  said, Alas, my daughter! Thou have brought me very low,  thou are one of those who trouble me, for I have opened my mouth to Jehovah,  I cannot go back.
Judg. And she said to him, My father, thou have opened thy mouth to Jehovah. Do to me according to that which has proceeded out of thy mouth, inasmuch as Jehovah has taken vengeance for thee on thine enemies, even on the sons of Ammon.
Judg. And she said to her father, Let this thing be done for me: Let me alone two months, that I may depart and go down upon the mountains,  bewail my virginity, I and my companions.
Judg. And he said, Go. And he sent her away for two months. And she departed, she and her companions,  bewailed her virginity upon the mountains.
Judg. And it came to pass at the end of two months, that she returned to her father, who did with her according to his vow which he had vowed,  she knew no man. And it was a custom in Israel,
Judg. that the daughters of Israel went yearly to celebrate the daughter of Jephthah the Gileadite four days in a year.
Judg. And the men of Ephraim were gathered together,  passed northward. And they said to Jephthah, Why did thou pass over to fight against the sons of Ammon,  did not call us to go with thee? We will burn thy house upon thee with fire.
Judg. And Jephthah said to them, I and my people were at great strife with the sons of Ammon,  when I called you, ye did not save me out of their hand.
Judg. And when I saw that ye did not save me, I put my life in my hand,  passed opposite the sons of Ammon,  Jehovah delivered them into my hand. Why then have ye come up to me this day, to fight against me?
Judg. Then Jephthah gathered together all the men of Gilead,  fought with Ephraim. And the men of Gilead smote Ephraim, because they said, Ye are fugitives of Ephraim, ye Gileadites, in the midst of Ephraim,  in the midst of Manasseh.
Judg. And the Gileadites took the fords of the Jordan against the Ephraimites. And it was so, that, when any of the fugitives of Ephraim said, Let me go over, the men of Gilead said to him, Are thou an Ephraimite? If he said, No,
Judg. then they said to him, Say now Shibboleth,  he said Sibboleth, for he could not frame to pronounce it right, then they laid hold on him,  killed him at the fords of the Jordan. And there fell at that time of Ephraim forty-two thousand.
Judg. And Jephthah judged Israel six years. Then Jephthah the Gileadite died,  was buried in one of the cities of Gilead.
Judg. And after him Ibzan of Bethlehem judged Israel.
Judg. And he had thirty sons. And he sent abroad thirty daughters,  thirty daughters he brought in from abroad for his sons. And he judged Israel seven years.
Judg. And Ibzan died,  was buried at Bethlehem.
Judg. And after him Elon the Zebulunite judged Israel,  he judged Israel ten years.
Judg. And Elon the Zebulunite died,  was buried in Aijalon in the land of Zebulun.
Judg. And after him Abdon the son of Hillel the Pirathonite judged Israel.
Judg. And he had forty sons and thirty sons' sons who rode on seventy donkey colts,  he judged Israel eight years.
Judg. And Abdon the son of Hillel the Pirathonite died,  was buried in Pirathon in the land of Ephraim, in the hill-country of the Amalekites.
Judg. And the sons of Israel again did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah,  Jehovah delivered them into the hand of the Philistines forty years.
Judg. And there was a certain man of Zorah, of the family of the Danites, whose name was Manoah,  his wife was barren,  did not bear.
Judg. And the agent of Jehovah appeared to the woman,  said to her, Behold now, thou are barren,  do not bear,  thou shall conceive,  bear a son.
Judg. Now therefore beware, I pray thee,  drink no wine nor strong drink,  do not eat any unclean thing,
Judg. for, lo, thou shall conceive,  bear a son. And no razor shall come upon his head, for the child shall be a Nazirite to God from the womb. And he shall begin to save Israel out of the hand of the Philistines.
Judg. Then the woman came and told her husband, saying, A man of God came to me,  his countenance was like the countenance of the agent of God, very awesome. And I did not ask him from where he was, neither did he tell me his name,
Judg. but he said to me, Behold, thou shall conceive,  bear a son. And now drink no wine nor strong drink,  do not eat any unclean thing, for the child shall be a Nazirite to God from the womb to the day of his death.
Judg. Then Manoah entreated Jehovah,  said, Oh, Lord, I pray thee, let the man of God whom thou sent come again to us,  teach us what we shall do to the child that shall be born.
Judg. And God hearkened to the voice of Manoah,  the agent of God came again to the woman as she sat in the field,  Manoah her husband was not with her.
Judg. And the woman made haste,  ran,  told her husband,  said to him, Behold, the man has appeared to me, who came to me the other day.
Judg. And Manoah arose,  went after his wife,  came to the man,  said to him, Are thou the man who spoke to the woman? And he said, I am.
Judg. And Manoah said, Now let thy words come to pass. What shall be the ordering of the child,  what shall we do to him?
Judg. And the agent of Jehovah said to Manoah, Of all that I said to the woman let her beware.
Judg. She may not eat of anything that comes of the vine, neither let her drink wine or strong drink, nor eat any unclean thing. All that I commanded her let her observe.
Judg. And Manoah said to the agent of Jehovah, I pray thee, let us detain thee, that we may make ready a kid for thee.
Judg. And the agent of Jehovah said to Manoah, Though thou detain me, I will not eat of thy bread,  if thou will make ready a burnt offering, thou must offer it to Jehovah. For Manoah did not know that he was the agent of Jehovah.
Judg. And Manoah said to the agent of Jehovah, What is thy name, that, when thy words come to pass, we may do thee honor?
Judg. And the agent of Jehovah said to him, Why do thou ask after my name, seeing it is wonderful?
Judg. So Manoah took the kid with the meal offering,  offered it upon the rock to Jehovah. And the agent did wondrously,  Manoah and his wife looked on,
Judg. for it came to pass, when the flame went up toward heaven from off the altar, that the agent of Jehovah ascended in the flame of the altar. And Manoah and his wife looked on,  they fell on their faces to the ground.
Judg. But the agent of Jehovah appeared no more to Manoah or to his wife. Then Manoah knew that he was the agent of Jehovah.
Judg. And Manoah said to his wife, We shall surely die, because we have seen God.
Judg. But his wife said to him, If Jehovah were pleased to kill us, he would not have received a burnt offering and a meal offering at our hand, neither would he have shown us all these things, nor would at this time have told such things as these.
Judg. And the woman bore a son,  called his name Samson. And the child grew,  Jehovah blessed him.
Judg. And the Spirit of Jehovah began to move him in Mahaneh-dan, between Zorah and Eshtaol.
Judg. And Samson went down to Timnah,  saw a woman in Timnah of the daughters of the Philistines.
Judg. And he came up,  told his father and his mother,  said, I have seen a woman in Timnah of the daughters of the Philistines. Now therefore get her for me to wife.
Judg. Then his father and his mother said to him, Is there never a woman among the daughters of thy brothers, or among all my people, that thou go to take a wife of the uncircumcised Philistines? And Samson said to his father, Get her for me, for she pleases me well.
Judg. But his father and his mother knew not that it was of Jehovah, for he sought an occasion against the Philistines. Now at that time the Philistines had rule over Israel.
Judg. Then Samson went down,  his father and his mother, to Timnah,  came to the vineyards of Timnah. And, behold, a young lion roared against him.
Judg. And the Spirit of Jehovah came mightily upon him,  he tore him apart as he would have torn a kid,  he had nothing in his hand. But he did not tell his father or his mother what he had done.
Judg. And he went down,  talked with the woman,  she pleased Samson well.
Judg. And after a while he returned to take her. And he turned aside to see the carcass of the lion, , behold, there was a swarm of bees in the body of the lion,  honey.
Judg. And he took it into his hands,  went on, eating as he went. And he came to his father and mother,  gave to them,  they ate,  he did not tell them that he had taken the honey out of the body of the lion.
Judg. And his father went down to the woman,  Samson made a feast there, for so the young men used to do.
Judg. And it came to pass, when they saw him, that they brought thirty companions to be with him.
Judg. And Samson said to them, Let me now put forth a riddle to you. If ye can declare it to me within the seven days of the feast,  find it out, then I will give you thirty linen garments and thirty changes of raiment,
Judg. but if ye cannot declare it to me, then ye shall give me thirty linen garments and thirty changes of raiment. And they said to him, Put forth thy riddle, that we may hear it.
Judg. And he said to them, Out of the eater came forth food,  out of the strong came forth sweetness. And they could not in three days declare the riddle.
Judg. And it came to pass on the seventh day, that they said to Samson's wife, Entice thy husband, that he may declare to us the riddle, lest we burn thee and thy father's house with fire. Have ye called us to impoverish us? Is it not so?
Judg. And Samson's wife wept before him,  said, Thou do but hate me,  not love me. Thou have put forth a riddle to the sons of my people,  have not told it to me. And he said to her, Behold, I have not told it to my father nor my mother,  shall I tell thee?
Judg. And she wept before him the seven days, while their feast lasted. And it came to pass on the seventh day, that he told her because she pressed him greatly. And she told the riddle to the sons of her people.
Judg. And the men of the city said to him on the seventh day before the sun went down, What is sweeter than honey? and what is stronger than a lion? And he said to them, If ye had not plowed with my heifer, ye would not have found out my riddle.
Judg. And the Spirit of Jehovah came mightily upon him,  he went down to Ashkelon,  smote thirty men of them,  took their spoil,  gave the changes of raiment to those who declared the riddle. And his anger was kindled,  he went up to his father's house.
Judg. But Samson's wife was given to his companion, whom he had used as his friend.
Judg. But it came to pass after a while, in the time of wheat harvest, that Samson visited his wife with a kid. And he said, I will go in to my wife into the chamber,  her father would not allow him to go in.
Judg. And her father said, I truly thought that thou had utterly hated her, therefore I gave her to thy companion. Is not her younger sister fairer than she? Take her, I pray thee, instead of her.
Judg. And Samson said to them, This time I shall be blameless in regard of the Philistines when I do them a mischief.
Judg. And Samson went and caught three hundred foxes,  took firebrands,  turned tail to tail,  put a firebrand in the midst between every two tails.
Judg. And when he had set the brands on fire, he let them go into the standing grain of the Philistines,  burnt up both the shocks and the standing grain,  also the oliveyards.
Judg. Then the Philistines said, Who has done this? And they said, Samson, the son-in-law of the Timnite, because he has taken his wife,  given her to his companion. And the Philistines came up,  burnt her and her father with fire.
Judg. And Samson said to them, If ye do after this manner, surely I will be avenged of you,  after that I will cease.
Judg. And he smote them hip and thigh with a great slaughter. And he went down and dwelt in the cleft of the rock of Etam.
Judg. Then the Philistines went up,  encamped in Judah,  spread themselves in Lehi.
Judg. And the men of Judah said, Why have ye come up against us? And they said, We come up to bind Samson, to do to him as he has done to us.
Judg. Then three thousand men of Judah went down to the cleft of the rock of Etam,  said to Samson, Know thou not that the Philistines are rulers over us? What then is this that thou have done to us? And he said to them, As they did to me, so have I done to them.
Judg. And they said to him, We have come down to bind thee, that we may deliver thee into the hand of the Philistines. And Samson said to them, Swear to me, that ye will not fall upon me yourselves.
Judg. And they spoke to him, saying, No,  we will bind thee fast,  deliver thee into their hand,  truly we will not kill thee. And they bound him with two new ropes,  brought him up from the rock.
Judg. When he came to Lehi, the Philistines shouted as they met him. And the Spirit of Jehovah came mightily upon him,  the ropes that were upon his arms became as flax that was burnt with fire,  his bands dropped from off his hands.
Judg. And he found a fresh jawbone of a donkey,  put forth his hand,  took it,  smote a thousand men with it.
Judg. And Samson said, With the jawbone of a donkey, heaps upon heaps, with the jawbone of a donkey I have smitten a thousand men.
Judg. And it came to pass, when he had made an end of speaking, that he cast away the jawbone out of his hand. And that place was called Ramath-lehi.
Judg. And he was very thirsty,  called on Jehovah,  said, Thou have given this great deliverance by the hand of thy servant,  now shall I die for thirst,  fall into the hand of the uncircumcised?
Judg. But God split the hollow place that is in Lehi,  water came out there. And when he had drunk his spirit came again,  he revived. Therefore the name of it was called En-hakkore, which is in Lehi to this day.
Judg. And he judged Israel in the days of the Philistines twenty years.
Judg. And Samson went to Gaza,  saw a harlot there,  went in to her.
Judg. And it was told the Gazites, saying, Samson has come here. And they encompassed him in,  laid wait for him all night in the gate of the city,  were quiet all the night, saying, Not till morning light, then we will kill him.
Judg. And Samson lay till midnight,  arose at midnight,  laid hold of the doors of the gate of the city,  the two posts,  plucked them up, bar and all,  put them upon his shoulders,  carried them up to the top of the mountain that is before Hebron.
Judg. And it came to pass afterward, that he loved a woman in the valley of Sorek, whose name was Delilah.
Judg. And the lords of the Philistines came up to her,  said to her, Entice him,  see in what his great strength lies,  by what means we may prevail against him, that we may bind him to afflict him. And we will give thee every one of us eleven hundred pieces of silver.
Judg. And Delilah said to Samson, Tell me, I pray thee, in what thy great strength lies,  with what thou might be bound to afflict thee.
Judg. And Samson said to her, If they bind me with seven green withes that were never dried, then I shall become weak,  be as another man.
Judg. Then the lords of the Philistines brought up to her seven green withes which had not been dried,  she bound him with them.
Judg. Now she had an ambush abiding in the inner chamber. And she said to him, The Philistines are upon thee, Samson. And he broke the withes, as a string of tow is broken when it touches the fire. So his strength was not known.
Judg. And Delilah said to Samson, Behold, thou have mocked me,  told me lies. Now tell me, I pray thee, with what thou might be bound.
Judg. And he said to her, If they only bind me with new ropes with which no work has been done, then I shall become weak,  be as another man.
Judg. So Delilah took new ropes,  bound him with it,  said to him, The Philistines are upon thee, Samson. And the ambushment was abiding in the inner chamber. And he broke them off his arms like a thread.
Judg. And Delilah said to Samson, Until now thou have mocked me,  told me lies. Tell me with what thou might be bound. And he said to her, If thou weave the seven locks of my head with the web.
Judg. And she fastened it with the pin,  said to him, The Philistines are upon thee, Samson. And he awoke out of his sleep,  plucked away the pin of the beam,  the web.
Judg. And she said to him, How can thou say, I love thee, when thy heart is not with me? Thou have mocked me these three times,  have not told me with what thy great strength lies.
Judg. And it came to pass, when she pressed him daily with her words,  urged him, that his soul was vexed to death.
Judg. And he told her all his heart,  said to her, There has not come a razor upon my head, for I have been a Nazirite to God from my mother's womb. If I be shaven, then my strength will go from me,  I shall become weak,  be like any other man.
Judg. And when Delilah saw that he had told her all his heart, she sent and called for the lords of the Philistines, saying, Come up this once, for he has told me all his heart. Then the lords of the Philistines came up to her,  brought the money in their hand.
Judg. And she made him sleep upon her knees,  she called for a man,  shaved off the seven locks of his head. And she began to afflict him,  his strength went from him.
Judg. And she said, The Philistines are upon thee, Samson. And he awoke out of his sleep,  said, I will go out as at other times,  shake myself free,  he knew not that Jehovah was departed from him.
Judg. And the Philistines laid hold on him,  put out his eyes. And they brought him down to Gaza,  bound him with fetters of brass,  he did grinding in the prison-house.
Judg. However the hair of his head began to grow again after he was shaven.
Judg. And the lords of the Philistines gathered together to offer a great sacrifice to Dagon their god,  to rejoice, for they said, Our god has delivered Samson our enemy into our hand.
Judg. And when the people saw him, they praised their god, for they said, Our god has delivered into our hand our enemy,  the destroyer of our country who has slain many of us.
Judg. And it came to pass, when their hearts were merry, that they said, Call for Samson, that he may make sport to us. And they called for Samson out of the prison-house,  he made sport before them. And they set him between the pillars.
Judg. And Samson said to the lad who held him by the hand, Allow me that I may feel the pillars upon which the house rests, that I may lean upon them.
Judg. Now the house was full of men and women,  all the lords of the Philistines were there. And there were upon the roof about three thousand men and women, who beheld while Samson made sport.
Judg. And Samson called to Jehovah,  said, O lord Jehovah, remember me, I pray thee,  strengthen me, I pray thee, only this once, O God, that I may be at once avenged of the Philistines for my two eyes.
Judg. And Samson took hold of the two middle pillars upon which the house rested,  leaned upon them, the one with his right hand,  the other with his left.
Judg. And Samson said, Let me die with the Philistines. And he bowed himself with all his might,  the house fell upon the lords,  upon all the people that were in it. So the dead that he killed at his death were more than those that he killed in his life.
Judg. Then his brothers and all the house of his father came down,  took him,  brought him up,  buried him between Zorah and Eshtaol in the burying-place of Manoah his father. And he judged Israel twenty years.
Judg. And there was a man of the hill-country of Ephraim, whose name was Micah.
Judg. And he said to his mother, The eleven hundred pieces of silver that were taken from thee, about which thou uttered a curse,  also spoke it in my ears, behold, the silver is with me. I took it. And his mother said, Blessed be my son from Jehovah.
Judg. And he restored the eleven hundred pieces of silver to his mother. And his mother said, I verily dedicate the silver to Jehovah from my hand for my son to make a graven image and a molten image. Now therefore I will restore it to thee.
Judg. And when he restored the money to his mother, his mother took two hundred pieces of silver,  gave them to the founder, who made of it a graven image and a molten image. And it was in the house of Micah.
Judg. And the man Micah had a house of gods,  he made an ephod,  teraphim,  consecrated one of his sons, who became his priest.
Judg. In those days there was no king in Israel. Every man did that which was right in his own eyes.
Judg. And there was a young man out of Bethlehem-judah, of the family of Judah, who was a Levite,  he sojourned there.
Judg. And the man departed out of the city, out of Bethlehem-judah, to sojourn where he could find a place. And he came to the hill-country of Ephraim to the house of Micah, as he journeyed.
Judg. And Micah said to him, From where come thou? And he said to him, I am a Levite of Bethlehem-judah,  I go to sojourn where I may find a place.
Judg. And Micah said to him, Dwell with me,  be to me a father and a priest,  I will give thee ten pieces of silver by the year,  a suit of apparel,  thy food. So the Levite went in.
Judg. And the Levite was content to dwell with the man,  the young man was to him as one of his sons.
Judg. And Micah consecrated the Levite,  the young man became his priest,  was in the house of Micah.
Judg. Then Micah said, Now I know that Jehovah will do me good, seeing I have a Levite for my priest.
Judg. In those days there was no king in Israel. And in those days the tribe of the Danites sought for them an inheritance to dwell in, for to that day their inheritance had not fallen to them among the tribes of Israel.
Judg. And the sons of Dan sent of their family five men from their whole number, men of valor, from Zorah,  from Eshtaol, to spy out the land,  to search it. And they said to them, Go, search the land. And they came to the hill-country of Ephraim to the house of Micah,  lodged there.
Judg. When they were by the house of Micah, they recognized the voice of the young man the Levite. And they turned aside there,  said to him, Who brought thee here? And what are thou doing in this place? And what have thou here?
Judg. And he said to them, Thus and thus has Micah dealt with me,  he has hired me,  I have become his priest.
Judg. And they said to him, Ask counsel, we pray thee, of God, that we may know whether our way which we go shall be prosperous.
Judg. And the priest said to them, Go in peace. Your way is before Jehovah in which ye go.
Judg. Then the five men departed,  came to Laish,  saw the people that were in it, how they dwelt in security, according to the manner of the Sidonians, quiet and secure, for there was none in the land possessing authority, that might put them to shame in anything. And they were far from the Sidonians,  had no dealings with any man.
Judg. And they came to their brothers to Zorah and Eshtaol. And their brothers said to them, What say ye?
Judg. And they said, Arise,  let us go up against them, for we have seen the land, , behold, it is very good,  are ye idle? Be not slothful to go and to enter in to possess the land.
Judg. When ye go, ye shall come to a people secure. And the land is large, for God has given it into your hand, a place where there is no want of anything that is on the earth.
Judg. And there set forth from there of the family of the Danites, out of Zorah and out of Eshtaol, six hundred men girded with weapons of war.
Judg. And they went up,  encamped in Kiriath-jearim, in Judah. Therefore they called that place Mahaneh-dan, to this day. Behold, it is behind Kiriath-jearim.
Judg. And they passed from there to the hill-country of Ephraim,  came to the house of Micah.
Judg. Then the five men who went to spy out the country of Laish, answered and said to their brothers, Do ye know that there is in these houses an ephod,  teraphim,  a graven image,  a molten image? Now therefore consider what ye have to do.
Judg. And they turned aside there,  came to the house of the young man the Levite, even to the house of Micah,  asked him of his welfare.
Judg. And the six hundred men girded with their weapons of war, who were of the sons of Dan, stood by the entrance of the gate.
Judg. And the five men who went to spy out the land went up,  came in there,  took the graven image,  the ephod,  the teraphim,  the molten image. And the priest stood by the entrance of the gate with the six hundred men girded with weapons of war.
Judg. And when these went into Micah's house,  fetched the graven image, the ephod,  the teraphim,  the molten image, the priest said to them, What do ye?
Judg. And they said to him, Hold thy peace, lay thy hand upon thy mouth,  go with us,  be to us a father and a priest. Is it better for thee to be priest to the house of one man, or to be priest to a tribe and a family in Israel?
Judg. And the priest's heart was glad,  he took the ephod,  the teraphim,  the graven image,  went in the midst of the people.
Judg. So they turned and departed,  put the little ones and the cattle and the goods before them.
Judg. When they were a good way from the house of Micah, the men who were in the houses near to Micah's house were gathered together,  overtook the sons of Dan.
Judg. And they cried out to the sons of Dan. And they turned their faces,  said to Micah, What troubles thee that thou come with such a company?
Judg. And he said, ye have taken away my gods which I made,  the priest,  have gone away,  what have I more? And how do ye then say to me, What troubles thee?
Judg. And the sons of Dan said to him, Let not thy voice be heard among us, lest angry fellows fall upon you,  thou lose thy life, with the lives of thy household.
Judg. And the sons of Dan went their way. And when Micah saw that they were too strong for him, he turned and went back to his house.
Judg. And they took that which Micah had made,  the priest whom he had,  came to Laish, to a people quiet and secure,  smote them with the edge of the sword,  they burnt the city with fire.
Judg. And there was no deliverer because it was far from Sidon,  they had no dealings with any man,  it was in the valley that lies by Beth-rehob. And they built the city,  dwelt in it.
Judg. And they called the name of the city Dan, after the name of Dan their father who was born to Israel. However the name of the city was Laish at first.
Judg. And the sons of Dan set up for themselves the graven image. And Jonathan, the son of Gershom, the son of Moses, he and his sons were priests to the tribe of the Danites until the day of the captivity of the land.
Judg. So they set up for them Micah's graven image which he made, all the time that the house of God was in Shiloh.
Judg. And it came to pass in those days, when there was no king in Israel, that there was a certain Levite sojourning on the farther side of the hill-country of Ephraim, who took to him a concubine out of Bethlehem-judah.
Judg. And his concubine played the harlot against him,  went away from him to her father's house to Bethlehem-judah,  was there the space of four months.
Judg. And her husband arose,  went after her, to speak kindly to her, to bring her again, having his servant with him,  a couple of donkeys. And she brought him into her father's house,  when the father of the damsel saw him, he rejoiced to meet him.
Judg. And his father-in-law, the damsel's father, retained him,  he abode with him three days. So they ate and drank,  lodged there.
Judg. And it came to pass on the fourth day, that they arose early in the morning,  he rose up to depart. And the damsel's father said to his son-in-law, Strengthen thy heart with a morsel of bread,  afterward ye shall go your way.
Judg. So they sat down,  ate and drank, both of them together. And the damsel's father said to the man, Be pleased, I pray thee, to tarry all night,  let thy heart be merry.
Judg. And the man rose up to depart,  his father-in-law urged him,  he lodged there again.
Judg. And he arose early in the morning on the fifth day to depart. And the damsel's father said, Strengthen thy heart, I pray thee,  tarry ye until the day declines. And they ate, both of them.
Judg. And when the man rose up to depart, he,  his concubine,  his servant, his father-in-law, the damsel's father, said to him, Behold, now the day draws toward evening, I pray you tarry all night. Behold, the day grows to an end, lodge here that thy heart may be merry,  tomorrow get early on your way that thou may go home.
Judg. But the man would not tarry that night,  he rose up and departed,  came opposite Jebus (the same is Jerusalem). And there were with him a couple of saddled donkeys. His concubine was also with him.
Judg. When they were by Jebus, the day was far spent,  the servant said to his master, Come, I pray thee,  let us turn aside into this city of the Jebusites,  lodge in it.
Judg. And his master said to him, We will not turn aside into the city of a foreigner that is not of the sons of Israel,  we will pass over to Gibeah.
Judg. And he said to his servant, Come and let us draw near to one of these places,  we will lodge in Gibeah, or in Ramah.
Judg. So they passed on and went their way. And the sun went down upon them near to Gibeah, which belongs to Benjamin.
Judg. And they turned aside there, to go in to lodge in Gibeah. And he went in,  sat down in the street of the city, for there was no man that took them into his house to lodge.
Judg. And, behold, there came an old man from his work out of the field at evening. Now the man was of the hill-country of Ephraim,  he sojourned in Gibeah,  the men of the place were Benjamites.
Judg. And he lifted up his eyes,  saw the wayfaring man in the street of the city. And the old man said, Where do thou go? And from where do thou come?
Judg. And he said to him, We are passing from Bethlehem-judah to the farther side of the hill-country of Ephraim. I am from there,  I went to Bethlehem-judah. And I am now going to the house of Jehovah,  there is no man that takes me into his house.
Judg. Yet there is both straw and provender for our donkeys,  there is bread and wine also for me,  for thy handmaid,  for the young man who is with thy servants. There is no want of anything.
Judg. And the old man said, Peace be to thee. However let all thy wants lie upon me, only do not lodge in the street.
Judg. So he brought him into his house,  gave the donkeys fodder. And they washed their feet,  ate and drank.
Judg. As they were making their hearts merry, behold, the men of the city, certain base fellows, beset the house round about, beating at the door. And they spoke to the master of the house, the old man, saying, Bring forth the man who came into thy house, that we may know him.
Judg. And the man, the master of the house, went out to them,  said to them, No, my brothers, I pray you, do not so wickedly, seeing that this man has come into my house. Do not this folly.
Judg. Behold, here is my daughter a virgin,  his concubine. I will bring them out now,  humble ye them,  do with them what seems good to you,  to this man do not any such folly.
Judg. But the men would not hearken to him. So the man laid hold on his concubine,  brought her forth to them. And they knew her,  abused her all the night until the morning,  when the day began to spring, they let her go.
Judg. Then the woman came in the dawning of the day,  fell down at the door of the man's house where her lord was, till it was light.
Judg. And her lord rose up in the morning,  opened the doors of the house,  went out to go his way, , behold, the woman his concubine was fallen down at the door of the house, with her hands upon the threshold.
Judg. And he said to her, Up,  let us be going,  there was no answering. Then he took her up upon the donkey,  the man rose up,  got to his place.
Judg. And when he came into his house, he took a knife,  laid hold on his concubine,  divided her, limb by limb, into twelve pieces,  sent her throughout all the borders of Israel.
Judg. And it was so, that all who saw it said, There was no such deed done nor seen from the day that the sons of Israel came up out of the land of Egypt to this day. Consider it, take counsel,  speak.
Judg. Then all the sons of Israel went out. And the congregation was assembled as one man, from Dan even to Beersheba, with the land of Gilead, to Jehovah at Mizpah.
Judg. And the chiefs of all the people, even of all the tribes of Israel, presented themselves in the assembly of the people of God, four hundred thousand footmen who drew a sword.
Judg. (Now the sons of Benjamin heard that the sons of Israel had gone up to Mizpah.) And the sons of Israel said, Tell us, how was this wickedness brought to pass?
Judg. And the Levite, the husband of the woman who was murdered, answered and said, I came into Gibeah that belongs to Benjamin, I and my concubine, to lodge.
Judg. And the men of Gibeah rose against me,  beset the house round about me by night. They thought to have me slain,  they forced my concubine,  she is dead.
Judg. And I took my concubine,  cut her in pieces,  sent her throughout all the country of the inheritance of Israel, for they have committed lewdness and folly in Israel.
Judg. Behold, ye sons of Israel, all of you, give here your advice and counsel.
Judg. And all the people arose as one man, saying, We will not any of us go to his tent, neither will we any of us turn to his house.
Judg. But now this is the thing which we will do to Gibeah: We will go up against it by lot,
Judg. and we will take ten men of a hundred throughout all the tribes of Israel,  a hundred of a thousand,  a thousand out of ten thousand, to fetch provision for the people, that they may do, when they come to Gibeah of Benjamin, according to all the folly that they have wrought in Israel.
Judg. So all the men of Israel were gathered against the city, knit together as one man.
Judg. And the tribes of Israel sent men through all the tribe of Benjamin, saying, What wickedness is this that has come to pass among you?
Judg. Now therefore deliver up the men, the base fellows, who are in Gibeah, that we may put them to death,  put away evil from Israel. But Benjamin would not hearken to the voice of their brothers the sons of Israel.
Judg. And the sons of Benjamin gathered themselves together out of the cities to Gibeah, to go out to battle against the sons of Israel.
Judg. And the sons of Benjamin were numbered on that day out of the cities twenty-six thousand men who drew a sword, besides the inhabitants of Gibeah, who were numbered seven hundred chosen men.
Judg. Among all this people there were seven hundred chosen men left-handed. Every one could sling stones at a hair-breadth,  not miss.
Judg. And the men of Israel, besides Benjamin, were numbered four hundred thousand men who drew a sword. All these were men of war.
Judg. And the sons of Israel arose,  went up to Bethel,  asked counsel of God. And they said, Who shall go up for us first to battle against the sons of Benjamin? And Jehovah said, Judah first.
Judg. And the sons of Israel rose up in the morning,  encamped against Gibeah.
Judg. And the men of Israel went out to battle against Benjamin. And the men of Israel set the battle in array against them at Gibeah.
Judg. And the sons of Benjamin came forth out of Gibeah,  destroyed down to the ground of the Israelites on that day twenty-two thousand men.
Judg. And the people, the men of Israel, encouraged themselves,  set the battle again in array in the place where they set themselves in array the first day.
Judg. And the sons of Israel went up and wept before Jehovah until evening. And they asked of Jehovah, saying, Shall I again draw near to battle against the sons of Benjamin my brother? And Jehovah said, Go up against him.
Judg. And the sons of Israel came near against the sons of Benjamin the second day.
Judg. And Benjamin went forth against them out of Gibeah the second day,  destroyed down to the ground of the sons of Israel again eighteen thousand men. All these drew the sword.
Judg. Then all the sons of Israel,  all the people, went up,  came to Bethel,  wept,  sat there before Jehovah,  fasted that day until evening,  they offered burnt offerings and peace offerings before Jehovah.
Judg. And the sons of Israel asked of Jehovah (for the ark of the covenant of God was there in those days,
Judg. and Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron, stood before it in those days), saying, Shall I yet again go out to battle against the sons of Benjamin my brother, or shall I cease? And Jehovah said, Go up, for tomorrow I will deliver him into thy hand.
Judg. And Israel set an ambushment against Gibeah round about.
Judg. And the sons of Israel went up against the sons of Benjamin on the third day,  set themselves in array against Gibeah, as at other times.
Judg. And the sons of Benjamin went out against the people,  were drawn away from the city. And they began to smite and kill of the people as at other times, in the highways, of which one goes up to Bethel,  the other to Gibeah, in the field about thirty men of Israel.
Judg. And the sons of Benjamin said, They are smitten down before us as at the first. But the sons of Israel said, Let us flee,  draw them away from the city to the highways.
Judg. And all the men of Israel rose up out of their place,  set themselves in array at Baal-tamar,  the ambushment of Israel broke forth out of their place, even out of Maareh-geba.
Judg. And there came opposite Gibeah ten thousand chosen men out of all Israel,  the battle was severe,  they knew not that evil was close upon them.
Judg. And Jehovah smote Benjamin before Israel,  the sons of Israel destroyed of Benjamin that day twenty-five thousand and a hundred men. All these drew the sword.
Judg. So the sons of Benjamin saw that they were smitten, for the men of Israel gave place to Benjamin because they trusted to the ambushment whom they had set against Gibeah.
Judg. And the ambushment hastened,  rushed upon Gibeah. And the ambushment drew themselves along,  smote all the city with the edge of the sword.
Judg. Now the appointed sign between the men of Israel and the ambushment was, that they should make a great cloud of smoke rise up out of the city.
Judg. And the men of Israel turned in the battle,  Benjamin began to smite and kill of the men of Israel about thirty persons, for they said, Surely they are smitten down before us as in the first battle.
Judg. But when the cloud began to arise up out of the city in a pillar of smoke, the Benjamites looked behind them, , behold, the whole of the city went up in smoke to heaven.
Judg. And the men of Israel turned,  the men of Benjamin were dismayed, for they saw that evil had come upon them.
Judg. Therefore they turned their backs before the men of Israel to the way of the wilderness. But the battle followed hard after them,  those who came out of the cities destroyed them in the midst of it.
Judg. They enclosed the Benjamites round about,  chased them,  trod them down at their resting-place, as far as opposite Gibeah toward the sunrise.
Judg. And there fell of Benjamin eighteen thousand men. All these were men of valor.
Judg. And they turned and fled toward the wilderness to the rock of Rimmon. And they gleaned of them in the highways five thousand men,  followed hard after them to Gidom,  smote of them two thousand men.
Judg. So that all who fell that day of Benjamin were twenty-five thousand men who drew the sword. All these were men of valor.
Judg. But six hundred men turned and fled toward the wilderness to the rock of Rimmon,  abode in the rock of Rimmon four months.
Judg. And the men of Israel turned again upon the sons of Benjamin,  smote them with the edge of the sword, both the entire city,  the cattle,  all that they found. Moreover they set on fire all the cities which they found.
Judg. Now the men of Israel had sworn in Mizpah, saying, There shall not any of us give his daughter to Benjamin to wife.
Judg. And the people came to Bethel,  sat there till evening before God,  lifted up their voices,  wept bitterly.
Judg. And they said, O Jehovah, the God of Israel, why has this come to pass in Israel, that there should be today one tribe lacking in Israel?
Judg. And it came to pass on the morrow, that the people rose early,  built there an altar,  offered burnt offerings and peace offerings.
Judg. And the sons of Israel said, Who is there among all the tribes of Israel that did not come up in the assembly to Jehovah? For they had made a great oath concerning him who did not come up to Jehovah to Mizpah, saying, He shall surely be put to death.
Judg. And the sons of Israel regretted for Benjamin their brother,  said, There is one tribe cut off from Israel this day.
Judg. What shall we do for wives for those who remain, since we have sworn by Jehovah that we will not give them of our daughters to wives?
Judg. And they said, Which one is there of the tribes of Israel that did not come up to Jehovah to Mizpah? And, behold, there came none to the camp from Jabesh-gilead to the assembly.
Judg. For when the people were numbered, behold, there were none of the inhabitants of Jabesh-gilead there.
Judg. And the congregation sent there twelve thousand men of the most valiant,  commanded them, saying, Go and smite the inhabitants of Jabesh-gilead with the edge of the sword, with the women and the little ones.
Judg. And this is the thing that ye shall do: Ye shall utterly destroy every male,  every woman that has lain by man.
Judg. And they found among the inhabitants of Jabesh-gilead four hundred young virgins who had not known man by lying with him,  they brought them to the camp to Shiloh, which is in the land of Canaan.
Judg. And the whole congregation sent and spoke to the sons of Benjamin who were in the rock of Rimmon,  proclaimed peace to them.
Judg. And Benjamin returned at that time,  they gave them the women whom they had saved alive of the women of Jabesh-gilead. And even so they were not sufficient for them.
Judg. And the people regretted for Benjamin, because Jehovah had made a breach in the tribes of Israel.
Judg. Then the elders of the congregation said, What shall we do for wives for those who remain, since the women are destroyed out of Benjamin?
Judg. And they said, There must be an inheritance for those who are escaped of Benjamin, that a tribe be not blotted out from Israel.
Judg. However we may not give them wives of our daughters, for the sons of Israel had sworn, saying, Cursed be he who gives a wife to Benjamin.
Judg. And they said, Behold, there is a feast of Jehovah from year to year in Shiloh, which is on the north of Bethel, on the east side of the highway that goes up from Bethel to Shechem,  on the south of Lebonah.
Judg. And they commanded the sons of Benjamin, saying, Go and lie in wait in the vineyards,
Judg. and watch. And, behold, if the daughters of Shiloh come out to dance in the dances, then come ye out of the vineyards,  catch for you every man his wife from the daughters of Shiloh,  go to the land of Benjamin.
Judg. And it shall be, when their fathers or their brothers come to complain to us, that we will say to them, Grant them graciously to us, because we took not for each man of them his wife in battle, neither did ye give them to them, else ye would now be guilty.
Judg. And the sons of Benjamin did so,  took for them wives, according to their number, of those who danced, whom they carried off. And they went and returned to their inheritance,  built the cities,  dwelt in them.
Judg. And the sons of Israel departed from there at that time, every man to his tribe and to his family,  they went out from there every man to his inheritance.
Judg. In those days there was no king in Israel. Every man did that which was right in his own eyes.
Ruth
Ruth. And it came to pass in the days when the judges judged, that there was a famine in the land. And a certain man of Bethlehem-judah went to sojourn in the country of Moab, he,  his wife,  his two sons.
Ruth. And the name of the man was Elimelech,  the name of his wife Naomi,  the name of his two sons Mahlon and Chilion, Ephrathites of Bethlehem-judah. And they came into the country of Moab,  continued there.
Ruth. And Elimelech, Naomi's husband, died,  she was left,  her two sons.
Ruth. And they took wives for them of the women of Moab. The name of the one was Orpah,  the name of the other Ruth,  they dwelt there about ten years.
Ruth. And Mahlon and Chilion died, both of them,  the woman was left of her two children and of her husband.
Ruth. Then she arose with her daughters-in-law that she might return from the country of Moab, for she had heard in the country of Moab how that Jehovah had visited his people in giving them bread.
Ruth. And she went forth out of the place where she was,  her two daughters-in-law with her,  they went on the way to return to the land of Judah.
Ruth. And Naomi said to her two daughters-in-law, Go, return each of you to her mother's house. Jehovah deal kindly with you, as ye have dealt with the dead,  with me.
Ruth. Jehovah grant you that ye may find rest, each of you in the house of her husband. Then she kissed them,  they lifted up their voices,  wept.
Ruth. And they said to her, No,  we will return with thee to thy people.
Ruth. And Naomi said, Turn again, my daughters. Why will ye go with me? Have I yet sons in my womb, that they may be your husbands?
Ruth. Turn again, my daughters. Go your way, for I am too old to have a husband. If I should say, I have hope. If I should even have a husband tonight,  should also bear sons,
Ruth. would ye therefore delay till they were grown? Would ye therefore stay from having husbands? No, my daughters, for it grieves me much for your sakes, for the hand of Jehovah has gone forth against me.
Ruth. And they lifted up their voices,  wept again. And Orpah kissed her mother-in-law,  Ruth clung to her.
Ruth. And she said, Behold, thy sister-in-law has gone back to her people,  to her god. Return thou after thy sister-in-law.
Ruth. And Ruth said, Entreat me not to leave thee,  to return from following after thee, for where thou go, I will go,  where thou lodge, I will lodge. Thy people shall be my people,  thy God my God.
Ruth. Where thou die, I will die,  there I will be buried. Jehovah do so to me,  more also, if anything but death parts thee and me.
Ruth. And when she saw that she was steadfastly minded to go with her, she left off speaking to her.
Ruth. So those two went until they came to Bethlehem. And it came to pass, when they came to Bethlehem, that all the city was moved about them,  the women said, Is this Naomi?
Ruth. And she said to them, Call me not Naomi. Call me Mara, for the Almighty has dealt very bitterly with me.
Ruth. I went out full,  Jehovah has brought me home again empty. Why do ye call me Naomi, seeing Jehovah has testified against me,  the Almighty has afflicted me?
Ruth. So Naomi returned,  Ruth the Moabitess, her daughter-in-law, with her, who returned out of the country of Moab. And they came to Bethlehem in the beginning of barley harvest.
Ruth. And Naomi had a kinsman of her husband's, a mighty man of wealth, of the family of Elimelech,  his name was Boaz.
Ruth. And Ruth the Moabitess said to Naomi, Let me now go to the field,  glean among the ears of grain after him in whose sight I shall find favor. And she said to her, Go, my daughter.
Ruth. And she went,  came and gleaned in the field after the reapers. And her chance was to land on the portion of the field belonging to Boaz, who was of the family of Elimelech.
Ruth. And, behold, Boaz came from Bethlehem,  said to the reapers, Jehovah be with you. And they answered him, Jehovah bless thee.
Ruth. Then Boaz said to his servant who was set over the reapers, Whose damsel is this?
Ruth. And the servant who was set over the reapers answered and said, It is the Moabite damsel who came back with Naomi out of the country of Moab.
Ruth. And she said, Let me glean, I pray you,  gather behind the reapers among the sheaves. So she came,  has continued even from the morning until now, except that she tarried a little in the house.
Ruth. Then Boaz said to Ruth, Do thou not hear, my daughter? Go not to glean in another field, neither pass from here,  abide here close by my maidens.
Ruth. Let thine eyes be on the field that they reap,  go thou after them. Have I not charged the young men that they shall not touch thee? And when thou are thirsty, go to the vessels,  drink of that which the young men have drawn.
Ruth. Then she fell on her face,  bowed herself to the ground,  said to him, Why have I found favor in thy sight that thou should take knowledge of me, seeing I am a foreigner?
Ruth. And Boaz answered and said to her, It has been fully shown me all that thou have done to thy mother-in-law since the death of thy husband,  how thou have left thy father and thy mother,  the land of thy nativity,  have come to a people that thou knew not formerly.
Ruth. Jehovah recompense thy work,  a full reward be given thee of Jehovah, the God of Israel, under whose wings thou have come to take refuge.
Ruth. Then she said, Let me find favor in thy sight, my lord, because thou have comforted me,  because thou have spoken kindly to thy handmaid, though I be not as one of thy handmaidens.
Ruth. And at mealtime Boaz said to her, Come here,  eat of the bread,  dip thy morsel in the vinegar. And she sat beside the reapers,  they passed her parched grain,  she ate,  was satisfied,  left of it.
Ruth. And when she arose up to glean, Boaz commanded his young men, saying, Let her glean even among the sheaves,  do not reproach her.
Ruth. And also pull out some for her from the bundles,  leave it,  let her glean,  do not rebuke her.
Ruth. So she gleaned in the field until evening. And she beat out that which she had gleaned,  it was about an ephah of barley.
Ruth. And she took it up,  went into the city,  her mother-in-law saw what she had gleaned. And she brought forth and gave to her that which she had left after she was satisfied.
Ruth. And her mother-in-law said to her, Where have thou gleaned today? And where have thou worked? Blessed be he who took knowledge of thee. And she showed her mother-in-law with whom she had worked,  said, The man's name with whom I worked today is Boaz.
Ruth. And Naomi said to her daughter-in-law, Blessed be he of Jehovah who has not left off his kindness to the living and to the dead. And Naomi said to her, The man is near of kin to us, one of our near kinsmen.
Ruth. And Ruth the Moabitess said, Yes, he said to me, Thou shall keep close by my young men until they have ended all my harvest.
Ruth. And Naomi said to Ruth her daughter-in-law, It is good, my daughter, that thou go out with his maidens,  that they not meet thee in any other field.
Ruth. So she kept close by the maidens of Boaz, to glean to the end of barley harvest and of wheat harvest. And she dwelt with her mother-in-law.
Ruth. And Naomi her mother-in-law said to her, My daughter, shall I not seek rest for thee, that it may be well with thee?
Ruth. And now is not Boaz our kinsman, with whose maidens thou were? Behold, he winnows barley tonight in the threshing-floor.
Ruth. Wash thyself therefore,  anoint thee,  put thy raiment upon thee,  get thee down to the threshing-floor. But do not make thyself known to the man until he shall have done eating and drinking.
Ruth. And it shall be, when he lies down, that thou shall notice the place where he shall lie. And thou shall go in,  uncover his feet,  lie thee down. And he will tell thee what thou shall do.
Ruth. And she said to her, All that thou say I will do.
Ruth. And she went down to the threshing-floor,  did according to all that her mother-in-law bade her.
Ruth. And when Boaz had eaten and drunk,  his heart was merry, he went to lie down at the end of the heap of grain. And she came softly,  uncovered his feet,  laid down.
Ruth. And it came to pass at midnight, that the man was startled,  turned himself, , behold, a woman lay at his feet.
Ruth. And he said, Who are thou? And she answered, I am Ruth thy handmaid. Spread therefore thy skirt over thy handmaid, for thou are a near kinsman.
Ruth. And he said, Blessed be thou of Jehovah, my daughter. Thou have shown more kindness in the latter end than at the beginning, inasmuch as thou did not follow young men, whether poor or rich.
Ruth. And now, my daughter, fear not. I will do to thee all that thou say, for all the city of my people know that thou are a worthy woman.
Ruth. And now it is true that I am a near kinsman. However there is a kinsman nearer than I.
Ruth. Remain this night,  it shall be in the morning that if he will perform to thee the part of a kinsman, well; let him do the kinsman's part. But if he will not do the part of a kinsman to thee, then I will do the part of a kinsman to thee, as Jehovah lives. Lie down until the morning.
Ruth. And she lay at his feet until the morning. And she rose up before one could discern another. For he said, Let it not be known that the woman came to the threshing-floor.
Ruth. And he said, Bring the mantle that is upon thee,  hold it. And she held it,  he measured six measures of barley,  laid it on her,  he went into the city.
Ruth. And when she came to her mother-in-law, she said, Who are thou, my daughter? And she told her all that the man had done to her.
Ruth. And she said, He gave me these six measures of barley, for he said, Go not empty to thy mother-in-law.
Ruth. Then she said, Sit still, my daughter, until thou know how the matter will fall, for the man will not rest until he has finished the thing this day.
Ruth. Now Boaz went up to the gate,  sat down there. And, behold, the near kinsman of whom Boaz spoke came by, to whom he said, Such man, stay, turn aside. Sit down here. And he turned aside,  sat down.
Ruth. And he took ten men of the elders of the city,  said, Sit ye down here. And they sat down.
Ruth. And he said to the near kinsman, Naomi, who has come again out of the country of Moab, sells the parcel of land, which was our brother Elimelech's.
Ruth. And I thought to disclose it to thee, saying, Buy it before those who sit here,  before the elders of my people. If thou will redeem it, redeem it,  if thou will not redeem it, then tell me that I may know, for there is none to redeem it besides thee,  I am after thee. And he said, I will redeem it.
Ruth. Then Boaz said, That day thou buy the field of the hand of Naomi, thou must buy it also of Ruth the Moabitess, the wife of the dead, to raise up the name of the dead upon his inheritance.
Ruth. And the near kinsman said, I cannot redeem it for myself lest I mar my own inheritance. Take thou my right of redemption on thee, for I cannot redeem it.
Ruth. Now this was the custom in former time in Israel concerning redeeming and concerning exchanging, to confirm all things: A man drew off his shoe,  gave it to his neighbor. And this was the manner of attestation in Israel.
Ruth. So the near kinsman said to Boaz, Buy it for thyself. And he drew off his shoe.
Ruth. And Boaz said to the elders,  to all the people, Ye are witnesses this day, that I have bought all that was Elimelech's,  all that was Chilion's and Mahlon's, from the hand of Naomi.
Ruth. Moreover Ruth the Moabitess, the wife of Mahlon, I have purchased to be my wife, to raise up the name of the dead upon his inheritance, that the name of the dead not be cut off from among his brothers,  from the gate of his place. Ye are witnesses this day.
Ruth. And all the people who were in the gate,  the elders, said, We are witnesses. Jehovah make the woman that has come into thy house like Rachel and like Leah, which two built the house of Israel,  do thou worthily in Ephrathah,  be famous in Bethlehem.
Ruth. And let thy house be like the house of Perez whom Tamar bore to Judah, of the seed which Jehovah shall give thee by this young woman.
Ruth. So Boaz took Ruth,  she became his wife. And he went in to her,  Jehovah gave her conception,  she bore a son.
Ruth. And the women said to Naomi, Blessed be Jehovah, who has not left thee this day without a near kinsman. And let his name be famous in Israel.
Ruth. And he shall be to thee a restorer of life,  a nourisher of thine old age, for thy daughter-in-law, who loves thee, who is better to thee than seven sons, has borne him.
Ruth. And Naomi took the child,  laid it in her bosom,  became nurse to it.
Ruth. And the women, her neighbors, gave it a name, saying, There is a son born to Naomi. And they called his name Obed. He is the father of Jesse, the father of David.
Ruth. Now these are the generations of Perez: Perez begot Hezron,
Ruth. and Hezron begot Ram,  Ram begot Amminadab,
Ruth. and Amminadab begot Nahshon,  Nahshon begot Salmon,
Ruth. and Salmon begot Boaz,  Boaz begot Obed,
Ruth. and Obed begot Jesse,  Jesse begot David.
I Samuel
Now there was a certain man of Ramathaim-zophim of the hill-country of Ephraim. And his name was Elkanah, the son of Jeroham, the son of Elihu, the son of Tohu, the son of Zuph, an Ephraimite.
And he had two wives: the name of the one was Hannah,  the name of the other Peninnah. And Peninnah had children,  Hannah had no children.
And this man went up out of his city from year to year to worship and to sacrifice to Jehovah of hosts in Shiloh. And the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, priests to Jehovah, were there.
And when the day came that Elkanah sacrificed, he gave to Peninnah his wife,  to all her sons and her daughters, portions,
but to Hannah he gave a double portion, for he loved Hannah,  Jehovah had shut up her womb.
And her rival provoked her greatly, to make her fret, because Jehovah had shut up her womb.
And as he did so year by year when she went up to the house of Jehovah, so she provoked her. Therefore she wept,  did not eat.
And Elkanah her husband said to her, Hannah, why do thou weep? And why do thou not eat? And why is thy heart grieved? Am not I better to thee than ten sons?
So Hannah rose up after they had eaten in Shiloh,  after they had drunk. Now Eli the priest was sitting upon his seat by the door-post of the temple of Jehovah.
And she was in bitterness of soul,  prayed to Jehovah,  wept much.
And she vowed a vow,  said, O Jehovah of hosts, if thou will indeed look on the affliction of thy handmaid,  remember me,  not forget thy handmaid,  will give to thy handmaid a man-child, then I will give him to Jehovah all the days of his life,  there shall no razor come upon his head.
And it came to pass, as she continued praying before Jehovah, that Eli noticed her mouth.
Now Hannah, she spoke in her heart; only her lips moved,  her voice was not heard. Therefore Eli thought she was drunk.
And Eli said to her, How long will thou be drunken? Put away thy wine from thee.
And Hannah answered and said, No, my lord, I am a woman of a sorrowful spirit. I have drunk neither wine nor strong drink,  I poured out my soul before Jehovah.
Count not thy handmaid for an iniquitous woman, for out of the abundance of my complaint and my provocation have I spoken until now.
Then Eli answered and said, Go in peace,  the God of Israel grant thy petition that thou have asked of him.
And she said, Let thy handmaid find favor in thy sight. So the woman went her way,  ate,  her countenance was no more sad.
And they rose up in the morning early,  worshiped before Jehovah,  returned,  came to their house to Ramah. And Elkanah knew Hannah his wife,  Jehovah remembered her.
And it came to pass, when the time came about, that Hannah conceived,  bore a son. And she called his name Samuel, saying, Because I have asked him of Jehovah.
And the man Elkanah,  all his house, went up to offer to Jehovah the yearly sacrifice,  his vow.
But Hannah did not go up, for she said to her husband, Not until the child be weaned,  then I will bring him, that he may appear before Jehovah,  abide there forever.
And Elkanah her husband said to her, Do what seems good to thee. Remain until thou have weaned him, only Jehovah establish his word. So the woman remained and gave her son suck, until she weaned him.
And when she had weaned him, she took him up with her, with three bullocks,  one ephah of meal,  a bottle of wine,  brought him to the house of Jehovah in Shiloh,  the child was young.
And they killed the bullock,  brought the child to Eli.
And she said, Oh, my lord, as thy soul lives, my lord, I am the woman who stood by thee here, praying to Jehovah.
I prayed for this child,  Jehovah has given me my petition which I asked of him.
Therefore also I have granted him to Jehovah; as long as he lives he is granted to Jehovah. And he worshiped Jehovah there.
And Hannah prayed,  said, My heart exults in Jehovah. My horn is exalted in Jehovah. My mouth is enlarged over my enemies because I rejoice in thy salvation.
There is none holy as Jehovah, for there is none besides thee, neither is there any rock like our God.
Talk no more so very proudly. Let not arrogancy come out of your mouth, for Jehovah is a God of knowledge,  by him actions are weighed.
The bows of the mighty men are broken,  those who stumbled are girded with strength.
Those who were full have hired out themselves for bread,  those who were hungry have ceased to hunger. Yea, the barren has borne seven,  she who has many sons languishes.
Jehovah kills,  makes alive. He brings down to Sheol,  brings up.
Jehovah makes poor,  makes rich. He brings low, he also lifts up.
He raises up the poor out of the dust, he lifts up the needy from the dunghill, to make them sit with rulers,  inherit the throne of glory. For the pillars of the earth are Jehovah's,  he has set the world upon them.
He will keep the feet of his holy ones,  the wicked shall be put to silence in darkness, for by strength no man shall prevail.
Those who strive with Jehovah shall be broken to pieces. He will thunder against them in heaven. Jehovah will judge the ends of the earth,  he will give strength to his king,  exalt the horn of his anointed.
And Elkanah went to Ramah to his house,  the child ministered to Jehovah before Eli the priest.
Now the sons of Eli were base men; they knew not Jehovah.
And the custom of the priests with the people was, that, when any man offered sacrifice, the priest's servant came, while the flesh was boiling, with a flesh-hook of three teeth in his hand,
and he struck it into the pan, or kettle, or caldron, or pot. All that the flesh-hook brought up the priest took with it. So they did in Shiloh to all the Israelites who came there.
And before they burned the fat, the priest's servant came,  said to the man who sacrificed, Give flesh to roast for the priest, for he will not have boiled flesh from thee,  raw.
And if the man said to him, They will surely burn the fat first,  then take as much as thy soul desires, then he would say, No,  thou shall give it to me now,  if not, I will take it by force.
And the sin of the young men was very great before Jehovah, for the men despised the offering of Jehovah.
But Samuel ministered before Jehovah, being a child, girded with a linen ephod.
Moreover his mother made him a little robe,  brought it to him from year to year when she came up with her husband to offer the yearly sacrifice.
And Eli blessed Elkanah and his wife,  said, Jehovah give thee seed by this woman for the petition which was asked of Jehovah. And they went to their own home.
And Jehovah visited Hannah,  she conceived,  bore three sons and two daughters. And the child Samuel grew before Jehovah.
Now Eli was very old. And he heard all that his sons did to all Israel,  how that they lay with the women who assembled at the door of the tent of meeting.
And he said to them, Why do ye such things? For I hear of your evil dealings from all this people.
No, my sons, for it is no good report that I hear. Ye make Jehovah's people to transgress.
If one man sins against another, God shall judge him,  if a man sins against Jehovah, who shall entreat for him? Notwithstanding, they did not hearken to the voice of their father, because Jehovah intended to kill them.
And the child Samuel grew on,  increased in favor both with Jehovah,  also with men.
And there came a man of God to Eli,  said to him, Thus says Jehovah, Did I reveal myself to the house of thy father when they were in Egypt in bondage to Pharaoh's house?
And did I choose him out of all the tribes of Israel to be my priest, to go up to my altar, to burn incense, to wear an ephod before me? And did I give to the house of thy father all the offerings of the sons of Israel made by fire?
Why do ye kick at my sacrifice and at my offering, which I have commanded in my habitation,  honor thy sons above me, to make yourselves fat with the chief of all the offerings of Israel my people?
Therefore Jehovah, the God of Israel, says, I said indeed that thy house,  the house of thy father, should walk before me forever,  now Jehovah says, Be it far from me, for those who honor me I will honor,  those who despise me shall be lightly esteemed.
Behold, the days come, that I will cut off thine arm,  the arm of thy father's house, that there shall not be an old man in thy house.
And thou shall see an enemy in my habitation, in all that I shall give Israel,  there shall not be an old man in thy house forever.
And the man of thine, whom I shall not cut off from my altar, shall be to consume thine eyes,  to grieve thy heart. And all the increase of thy house shall die in the flower of their age.
And this shall be the sign to thee, that shall come upon thy two sons, on Hophni and Phinehas: In one day they shall die, both of them.
And I will raise up for me a faithful priest who shall do according to that which is in my heart and in my mind. And I will build for him a sure house,  he shall walk before my anointed forever.
And it shall come to pass, that everyone who is left in thy house shall come and bow down to him for a piece of silver and a loaf of bread,  shall say, Put me, I pray thee, into one of the priests' offices that I may eat a morsel of bread.
And the child Samuel served Jehovah before Eli. And the word of Jehovah was precious in those days; there was no frequent vision.
And it came to pass at that time, when Eli was laid down in his place (now his eyes had begun to grow dim so that he could not see),
and the lamp of God was not yet gone out,  Samuel was laid down in the temple of Jehovah where the ark of God was,
that Jehovah called Samuel. And he said, Here I am.
And he ran to Eli,  said, Here I am, for thou called me. And he said, I did not call. Lie down again. And he went and lay down.
And Jehovah called yet again, Samuel. And Samuel arose and went to Eli,  said, Here I am, for thou called me. And he answered, I did not call, my son. Lie down again.
Now Samuel did not yet know Jehovah, neither was the word of Jehovah yet revealed to him.
And Jehovah called Samuel again the third time. And he arose and went to Eli,  said, Here I am, for thou called me. And Eli perceived that Jehovah had called the child.
Therefore Eli said to Samuel, Go, lie down,  it shall be, if he calls thee, that thou shall say, Speak, Jehovah, for thy servant hears. So Samuel went and lay down in his place.
And Jehovah came,  stood,  called as at other times, Samuel, Samuel. Then Samuel said, Speak, for thy servant hears.
And Jehovah said to Samuel, Behold, I will do a thing in Israel at which both the ears of everyone who hears it shall tingle.
In that day I will perform against Eli all that I have spoken concerning his house, from the beginning even to the end.
For I have told him that I will judge his house forever, for the iniquity which he knew, because his sons brought a curse upon themselves,  he did not restrain them.
And therefore I have sworn to the house of Eli that the iniquity of Eli's house shall not be expiated with sacrifice nor offering forever.
And Samuel lay until the morning,  opened the doors of the house of Jehovah. And Samuel was afraid to show Eli the vision.
Then Eli called Samuel,  said, Samuel, my son. And he said, Here I am.
And he said, What is the thing that Jehovah has spoken to thee? I pray thee, hide it not from me. God do so to thee,  more also, if thou hide anything from me of all the things that he spoke to thee.
And Samuel told him every whit,  hid nothing from him. And he said, It is Jehovah. Let him do what seems him good.
And Samuel grew,  Jehovah was with him,  let none of his words fall to the ground.
And all Israel from Dan even to Beersheba knew that Samuel was established to be a prophet of Jehovah.
And Jehovah appeared again in Shiloh, for Jehovah revealed himself to Samuel in Shiloh by the word of Jehovah.
And the word of Samuel came to all Israel. Now Israel went out against the Philistines to battle,  encamped beside Ebenezer,  the Philistines encamped in Aphek.
And the Philistines put themselves in array against Israel. And when they joined battle, Israel was smitten before the Philistines; and they killed of the army in the field about four thousand men.
And when the people came into the camp, the elders of Israel said, Why has Jehovah smitten us today before the Philistines? Let us fetch the ark of the covenant of Jehovah out of Shiloh to us, that it may come among us,  save us out of the hand of our enemies.
So the people sent to Shiloh,  they brought from there the ark of the covenant of Jehovah of hosts, who sits above the cherubim. And the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, were there with the ark of the covenant of God.
And when the ark of the covenant of Jehovah came into the camp, all Israel shouted with a great shout, so that the earth rang again.
And when the Philistines heard the noise of the shout, they said, What is the meaning of the noise of this great shout in the camp of the Hebrews? And they understood that the ark of Jehovah came into the camp.
And the Philistines were afraid, for they said, God has come into the camp. And they said, Woe to us! For there has not been such a thing heretofore.
Woe to us! Who shall deliver us out of the hand of these mighty gods? These are the gods that smote the Egyptians with all manner of plagues in the wilderness.
Be strong,  strengthen yourselves like men, O ye Philistines, that ye be not servants to the Hebrews, as they have been to you. Conduct yourselves like men,  fight.
And the Philistines fought,  Israel was smitten,  they fled every man to his tent. And there was a very great slaughter, for there fell of Israel thirty thousand footmen.
And the ark of God was taken,  the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, were killed.
And there ran a man of Benjamin out of the army,  came to Shiloh the same day, with his clothes torn,  with dirt upon his head.
And when he came, lo, Eli was sitting upon his seat by the wayside watching, for his heart trembled for the ark of God. And when the man came into the city,  told it, all the city cried out.
And when Eli heard the noise of the crying, he said, What does the noise of this tumult mean? And the man hastened,  came and told Eli.
Now Eli was ninety-eight years old,  his eyes were dim so that he could not see.
And the man said to Eli, I am he who came out of the army,  I fled today out of the army. And he said, How did the matter go, my son?
And he who brought the news answered and said, Israel has fled before the Philistines,  there has been also a great slaughter among the people. And thy two sons also, Hophni and Phinehas, are dead,  the ark of God is taken.
And it came to pass, when he made mention of the ark of God, that Eli fell from off his seat backward by the side of the gate. And his neck broke,  he died, for he was an old man,  heavy. And he had judged Israel forty years.
And his daughter-in-law, Phinehas' wife, was with child, near to be delivered. And when she heard the news that the ark of God was taken,  that her father-in-law and her husband were dead, she bowed herself and brought forth, for her pains came upon her.
And about the time of her death the women who stood by her said to her, Fear not, for thou have brought forth a son. But she did not answer, neither did she regard it.
And she named the child Ichabod, saying, The glory has departed from Israel, because the ark of God was taken,  because of her father-in-law and her husband.
And she said, The glory has departed from Israel, for the ark of God is taken.
Now the Philistines had taken the ark of God,  they brought it from Ebenezer to Ashdod.
And the Philistines took the ark of God,  brought it into the house of Dagon,  set it by Dagon.
And when those of Ashdod arose early on the morrow, behold, Dagon was fallen upon his face to the ground before the ark of Jehovah. And they took Dagon,  set him in his place again.
And when they arose early on the morning of the morrow, behold, Dagon was fallen upon his face to the ground before the ark of Jehovah,  the head of Dagon and both the palms of his hands lay cut off upon the threshold. Only the stump of Dagon was left to him.
Therefore neither the priests of Dagon, nor any who come into Dagon's house, tread on the threshold of Dagon in Ashdod, to this day.
But the hand of Jehovah was heavy upon them of Ashdod,  he destroyed them,  smote them with tumors, even Ashdod and the borders of it.
And when the men of Ashdod saw that it was so, they said, The ark of the God of Israel shall not abide with us, for his hand is hard upon us,  upon Dagon our god.
They sent therefore and gathered all the lords of the Philistines to them,  said, What shall we do with the ark of the God of Israel? And they answered, Let the ark of the God of Israel be carried about to Gath. And they carried the ark of the God of Israel there.
And it was so, that, after they had carried it about, the hand of Jehovah was against the city with a very great discomfiture. And he smote the men of the city, both small and great,  tumors broke out upon them.
So they sent the ark of God to Ekron. And it came to pass, as the ark of God came to Ekron, that the Ekronites cried out, saying, They have brought about the ark of the God of Israel to us, to kill us and our people.
They sent therefore and gathered together all the lords of the Philistines,  they said, Send away the ark of the God of Israel,  let it go again to its own place, that it not kill us and our people. For there was a deadly discomfiture throughout all the city; the hand of God was very heavy there.
And the men who did not die were smitten with the tumors,  the cry of the city went up to heaven.
And the ark of Jehovah was in the country of the Philistines seven months.
And the Philistines called for the priests and the psychics, saying, What shall we do with the ark of Jehovah? Show us with what we shall sent it to its place.
And they said, If ye send away the ark of the God of Israel, do not send it empty,  by all means return for him a trespass offering. Then ye shall be healed,  it shall be known to you why his hand is not removed from you.
Then they said, What shall be the trespass offering which we shall return to him? And they said, Five golden tumors,  five golden mice, according to the number of the lords of the Philistines, for one plague was on you all,  on your lords.
Therefore ye shall make images of your tumors,  images of your mice that mar the land. And ye shall give glory to the God of Israel. Perhaps he will lighten his hand from off you,  from off your gods,  from off your land.
Why then do ye harden your hearts as the Egyptians and Pharaoh hardened their hearts? When he had wrought wonderfully among them, did they not let the people go,  they departed?
Now therefore take and prepare for you a new cart,  two milk cows on which there has come no yoke. And tie the cows to the cart,  bring their calves home from them.
And take the ark of Jehovah,  lay it upon the cart. And put the jewels of gold, which ye return to him for a trespass offering, in a coffer by the side of it,  send it away, that it may go.
And watch. If it goes up by the way of its own border to Beth-shemesh, then he has done to us this great evil,  if not, then we shall know that it is not his hand that smote us; it was a chance that happened to us.
And the men did so,  took two milk cows,  tied them to the cart,  shut up their calves at home.
And they put the ark of Jehovah upon the cart,  the coffer with the mice of gold and the images of their tumors.
And the cows took the straight way by the way to Beth-shemesh. They went along the highway, lowing as they went,  turned not aside to the right hand or to the left. And the lords of the Philistines went behind them to the border of Beth-shemesh.
And those of Beth-shemesh were reaping their wheat harvest in the valley. And they lifted up their eyes,  saw the ark,  rejoiced to see it.
And the cart came into the field of Joshua the Beth-shemite,  stood there where there was a great stone. And they split the wood of the cart,  offered up the cows for a burnt offering to Jehovah.
And the Levites took down the ark of Jehovah,  the coffer that was with it, in which the jewels of gold were,  put them on the great stone. And the men of Beth-shemesh offered burnt offerings and sacrificed sacrifices the same day to Jehovah.
And when the five lords of the Philistines had seen it, they returned to Ekron the same day.
And these are the golden tumors which the Philistines returned for a trespass offering to Jehovah: for Ashdod one, for Gaza one, for Ashkelon one, for Gath one, for Ekron one.
And the golden mice, according to the number of all the cities of the Philistines belonging to the five lords, both of fortified cities and of country villages, even to the great stone on which they set down the ark of Jehovah, which stone remains to this day in the field of Joshua the Beth-shemite.
And he smote of the men of Beth-shemesh, because they had looked into the ark of Jehovah. He smote of the people fifty thousand and seventy men. And the people mourned, because Jehovah had smitten the people with a great slaughter.
And the men of Beth-shemesh said, Who is able to stand before Jehovah, this holy God? And to whom shall he go up from us?
And they sent messengers to the inhabitants of Kiriath-jearim, saying, The Philistines have brought back the ark of Jehovah. Come ye down,  fetch it up to you.
And the men of Kiriath-jearim came,  fetched up the ark of Jehovah,  brought it into the house of Abinadab in the hill,  sanctified Eleazar his son to keep the ark of Jehovah.
And it came to pass, from the day that the ark abode in Kiriath-jearim, that the time was long, for it was twenty years,  all the house of Israel lamented after Jehovah.
And Samuel spoke to all the house of Israel, saying, If ye do return to Jehovah with all your heart, then put away the foreign gods and the Ashtaroth from among you,  direct your hearts to Jehovah,  serve him only. And he will deliver you out of the hand of the Philistines.
Then the sons of Israel did put away the Baalim and the Ashtaroth,  served Jehovah only.
And Samuel said, Gather all Israel to Mizpah,  I will pray for you to Jehovah.
And they gathered together to Mizpah,  drew water,  poured it out before Jehovah,  fasted on that day,  said there, We have sinned against Jehovah. And Samuel judged the sons of Israel in Mizpah.
And when the Philistines heard that the sons of Israel were gathered together to Mizpah, the lords of the Philistines went up against Israel. And when the sons of Israel heard it, they were afraid of the Philistines.
And the sons of Israel said to Samuel, Do not cease to cry to Jehovah our God for us, that he will save us out of the hand of the Philistines.
And Samuel took a sucking lamb,  offered it for a whole burnt offering to Jehovah. And Samuel cried to Jehovah for Israel,  Jehovah answered him.
And as Samuel was offering up the burnt offering, the Philistines drew near to battle against Israel,  Jehovah thundered with a great thunder on that day upon the Philistines,  discomfited them,  they were smitten down before Israel.
And the men of Israel went out of Mizpah,  pursued the Philistines,  smote them until they came under Beth-car.
Then Samuel took a stone,  set it between Mizpah and Shen,  called the name of it Ebenezer, saying, Jehovah has helped us to now.
So the Philistines were subdued,  they came no more within the border of Israel,  the hand of Jehovah was against the Philistines all the days of Samuel.
And the cities which the Philistines had taken from Israel were restored to Israel, from Ekron even to Gath. And Israel delivered the border of it out of the hand of the Philistines. And there was peace between Israel and the Amorites.
And Samuel judged Israel all the days of his life.
And he went from year to year in circuit to Bethel,  Gilgal,  Mizpah. And he judged Israel in all those places.
And his return was to Ramah, for his house was there. And there he judged Israel,  there he built an altar to Jehovah.
And it came to pass, when Samuel was old, that he made his sons judges over Israel.
Now the name of his firstborn was Joel,  the name of his second, Abijah. They were judges in Beersheba.
And his sons did not walk in his ways,  turned aside after dishonest gain,  took bribes,  perverted justice.
Then all the elders of Israel gathered themselves together,  came to Samuel to Ramah.
And they said to him, Behold, thou are old,  thy sons do not walk in thy ways. Now make for us a king to judge us like all the nations.
But the thing displeased Samuel when they said, Give us a king to judge us. And Samuel prayed to Jehovah.
And Jehovah said to Samuel, Hearken to the voice of the people in all that they say to thee, for they have not rejected thee,  they have rejected me, that I should not be king over them.
According to all the works which they have done since the day that I brought them up out of Egypt even to this day, in that they have forsaken me,  served other gods, so do they also to thee.
Now therefore hearken to their voice. However thou shall protest solemnly to them,  shall show them the manner of the king who shall reign over them.
And Samuel told all the words of Jehovah to the people who asked of him a king.
And he said, This will be the manner of the king who shall reign over you: He will take your sons,  appoint them to him for his chariots,  to be his horsemen,  they shall run before his chariots.
And he will appoint them to him for captains of thousands,  captains of fifties. And he will set some to plow his ground,  to reap his harvest,  to make his instruments of war,  the instruments of his chariots.
And he will take your daughters to be perfumers,  to be cooks,  to be bakers.
And he will take your fields,  your vineyards,  your oliveyards, even the best of them,  give them to his servants.
And he will take the tenth of your seed,  of your vineyards,  give to his officers,  to his servants.
And he will take your men-servants,  your maid-servants,  your finest young men,  your donkeys,  put them to his work.
He will take the tenth of your flocks. And ye shall be his servants.
And ye shall cry out in that day because of your king whom ye shall have chosen you,  Jehovah will not answer you in that day.
But the people refused to hearken to the voice of Samuel. And they said, No,  we will have a king over us
that we also may be like all the nations,  that our king may judge us,  go out before us,  fight our battles.
And Samuel heard all the words of the people,  he repeated them in the ears of Jehovah.
And Jehovah said to Samuel, Hearken to their voice,  make for them a king. And Samuel said to the men of Israel, Go ye every man to his city.
Now there was a man of Benjamin whose name was Kish, the son of Abiel, the son of Zeror, the son of Becorath, the son of Aphiah, the son of a Benjamite, a mighty man of valor.
And he had a son whose name was Saul, a young man and fine looking. And there was not among the sons of Israel a man better looking than he. From his shoulders and upward he was taller than any of the people.
And the donkeys of Kish, Saul's father, were lost. And Kish said to Saul his son, Take now one of the servants with thee,  arise, go seek the donkeys.
And he passed through the hill-country of Ephraim,  passed through the land of Shalishah,  they did not find them. Then they passed through the land of Shaalim,  they were not there. And he passed through the land of the Benjamites,  they did not find them.
When they came to the land of Zuph, Saul said to his servant who was with him, Come,  let us return, lest my father leave off caring for the donkeys,  be anxious for us.
And he said to him, Behold now, there is in this city a man of God,  he is a man who is held in honor. All that he says comes surely to pass. Now let us go there, perhaps he can tell us concerning our journey on which we go.
Then Saul said to his servant, But behold, if we go, what shall we bring the man? For the bread is spent in our vessels,  there is not a present to bring to the man of God. What have we?
And the servant answered Saul again,  said, Behold, I have in my hand the fourth part of a shekel of silver. I will give that to the man of God, to tell us our way.
(Formerly in Israel, when a man went to inquire of God, thus he said, Come,  let us go to the seer, for he who is now called a Prophet was formerly called a Seer.)
Then Saul said to his servant, Well said. Come, let us go. So they went to the city where the man of God was.
As they went up the ascent to the city, they found young maidens going out to draw water,  said to them, Is the seer here?
And they answered them,  said, He is. Behold, he is before thee. Make haste now, for he has come today into the city, for the people have a sacrifice today in the high place.
As soon as ye have come into the city, ye shall straightaway find him before he goes up to the high place to eat. For the people will not eat until he comes, because he blesses the sacrifice,  afterwards those who are bidden eat. Now therefore get you up, for at this time ye shall find him.
And they went up to the city. And as they came within the city, behold, Samuel came out toward them, to go up to the high place.
Now Jehovah had revealed to Samuel a day before Saul came, saying,
Tomorrow about this time I will send thee a man out of the land of Benjamin,  thou shall anoint him to be prince over my people Israel. And he shall save my people out of the hand of the Philistines, for I have looked upon my people, because their cry has come to me.
And when Samuel saw Saul, Jehovah said to him, Behold, the man of whom I spoke to thee! This man shall have authority over my people.
Then Saul drew near to Samuel in the gate,  said, Tell me, I pray thee, where the seer's house is.
And Samuel answered Saul,  said, I am the seer. Go up before me to the high place, for ye shall eat with me today. And in the morning I will let thee go,  will tell thee all that is in thy heart.
And as for thy donkeys that were lost three days ago, set not thy mind on them, for they are found. And for whom is all that is desirable in Israel? Is it not for thee,  for all thy father's house?
And Saul answered and said, Am I not a Benjamite, of the smallest of the tribes of Israel? And my family the least of all the families of the tribe of Benjamin? Why then speak thou to me according to this manner?
And Samuel took Saul and his servant,  brought them into the guest-chamber,  made them sit in the chief place among those who were bidden, who were about thirty men.
And Samuel said to the cook, Bring the portion which I gave thee, of which I said to thee, Set it by thee.
And the cook took up the thigh,  that which was upon it,  set it before Saul. And Samuel said, Behold, that which has been reserved! Set it before thee and eat, because it has been kept for thee to the appointed time, for I said, I have invited the people. So Saul ate with Samuel that day.
And when they came down from the high place into the city, he conversed with Saul upon the housetop.
And they arose early. And it came to pass about the dawning of the day, that Samuel called to Saul on the housetop, saying, Up, that I may send thee away. And Saul arose,  they went out both of them, he and Samuel, abroad.
As they were going down at the end of the city, Samuel said to Saul, Bid the servant pass on before us (and he passed on),  stand thou still first, that I may cause thee to hear the word of God.
Then Samuel took the vial of oil,  poured it upon his head,  kissed him,  said, Is it not that Jehovah has anointed thee to be prince over his inheritance?
When thou are departed from me today, then thou shall find two men by Rachel's sepulcher in the border of Benjamin at Zelzah. And they will say to thee, The donkeys which thou went to seek are found, , lo, thy father has left off caring for the donkeys,  is anxious for you, saying, What shall I do for my son?
Then thou shall go on forward from there,  thou shall come to the oak of Tabor. And there shall meet thee there three men going up to God to Bethel, one carrying three kids,  another carrying three loaves of bread,  another carrying a bottle of wine.
And they will salute thee,  give thee two loaves of bread, which thou shall receive from their hand.
After that thou shall come to the hill of God where is the garrison of the Philistines. And it shall come to pass, when thou have come there to the city, that thou shall meet a band of prophets coming down from the high place with a psaltery,  a timbrel,  a pipe,  a harp, before them,  they will be prophesying.
And the Spirit of Jehovah will come mightily upon thee,  thou shall prophesy with them,  shall be turned into another man.
And let it be, when these signs have come to thee, that thou do as occasion shall serve thee, for God is with thee.
And thou shall go down before me to Gilgal. And, behold, I will come down to thee, to offer burnt offerings,  to sacrifice sacrifices of peace offerings. Thou shall tarry seven days till I come to thee,  show thee what thou shall do.
And it was so, that, when he had turned his back to go from Samuel, God gave him another heart. And all those signs came to pass that day.
And when they came there to the hill, behold, a band of prophets met him. And the Spirit of God came mightily upon him,  he prophesied among them.
And it came to pass, when all who knew him formerly saw, that, behold, he prophesied with the prophets, then the people said one to another, What is this that has come to the son of Kish? Is Saul also among the prophets?
And a man from the same place answered and said, And who is their father? Therefore it became a proverb, Is Saul also among the prophets?
And when he had made an end of prophesying, he came to the high place.
And Saul's uncle said to him and to his servant, Where did ye go? And he said, To seek the donkeys,  when we saw that they were not found, we came to Samuel.
And Saul's uncle said, Tell me, I pray thee, what Samuel said to you.
And Saul said to his uncle, He told us plainly that the donkeys were found. But concerning the matter of the kingdom, of which Samuel spoke, he did not tell him.
And Samuel called the people together to Jehovah to Mizpah.
And he said to the sons of Israel, Thus says Jehovah, the God of Israel, I brought up Israel out of Egypt,  I delivered you out of the hand of the Egyptians,  out of the hand of all the kingdoms that oppressed you,
but ye have this day rejected your God who himself saves you out of all your calamities and your distresses,  ye have said to him, No,  set a king over us. Now therefore present yourselves before Jehovah by your tribes,  by your thousands.
So Samuel brought all the tribes of Israel near,  the tribe of Benjamin was taken.
And he brought the tribe of Benjamin near by their families,  the family of the Matrites was taken,  Saul the son of Kish was taken. But when they sought him, he could not be found.
Therefore they asked of Jehovah further, Is there yet a man to come here? And Jehovah answered, Behold, he has hid himself among the baggage.
And they ran and fetched him from there. And when he stood among the people, he was higher than any of the people from his shoulders and upward.
And Samuel said to all the people, See ye him whom Jehovah has chosen, that there is none like him among all the people? And all the people shouted,  said, Live, O king!
Then Samuel told the people the manner of the kingdom,  wrote it in a book,  laid it up before Jehovah. And Samuel sent all the people away, every man to his house.
And Saul also went to his house to Gibeah,  mighty men went with him, whose hearts God had touched.
But certain worthless fellows said, How shall this man save us? And they despised him,  brought him no present. But he held his peace.
Then Nahash the Ammonite came up,  encamped against Jabesh-gilead. And all the men of Jabesh said to Nahash, Make a covenant with us,  we will serve thee.
And Nahash the Ammonite said to them, On this condition will I make it with you, that all your right eyes be put out,  I will lay it for a reproach upon all Israel.
And the elders of Jabesh said to him, Give us seven days' respite that we may send messengers to all the borders of Israel,  then, if there be none to save us, we will come out to thee.
Then the messengers came to Gibeah of Saul,  spoke these words in the ears of the people. And all the people lifted up their voice,  wept.
And, behold, Saul came following the oxen out of the field,  Saul said, What troubles the people that they weep? And they told him the words of the men of Jabesh.
And the Spirit of God came mightily upon Saul when he heard those words,  his anger was greatly kindled.
And he took a yoke of oxen,  cut them in pieces,  sent them throughout all the borders of Israel by the hand of messengers, saying, Whoever does not come forth behind Saul and behind Samuel, so shall it be done to his oxen. And the dread of Jehovah fell on the people,  they came out as one man.
And he numbered them in Bezek,  the sons of Israel were three hundred thousand,  the men of Judah thirty thousand.
And they said to the messengers who came, Thus ye shall say to the men of Jabesh-gilead, Tomorrow, by the time the sun is hot, ye shall have deliverance. And the messengers came and told the men of Jabesh,  they were glad.
Therefore the men of Jabesh said, Tomorrow we will come out to you,  ye shall do with us all that seems good to you.
And it was so on the morrow, that Saul put the people in three companies. And they came into the midst of the camp in the morning watch,  smote the Ammonites until the heat of the day. And it came to pass, that those who remained were scattered so that not two of them were left together.
And the people said to Samuel, Who is he who said, Shall Saul reign over us? Bring the men that we may put them to death.
And Saul said, There shall not a man be put to death this day, for today Jehovah has wrought deliverance in Israel.
Then Samuel said to the people, Come,  let us go to Gilgal,  renew the kingdom there.
And all the people went to Gilgal. And there they made Saul king before Jehovah in Gilgal,  there they offered sacrifices of peace offerings before Jehovah,  there Saul and all the men of Israel rejoiced greatly.
And Samuel said to all Israel, Behold, I have hearkened to your voice in all that ye said to me,  have made a king over you.
And now, behold, the king walks before you. And I am old and gray headed, , behold, my sons are with you. And I have walked before you from my youth to this day.
Here I am. Witness against me before Jehovah,  before his anointed: Whose ox have I taken? Or whose donkey have I taken? Or whom have I defrauded? Whom have I oppressed? Or of whose hand have I taken a bribe to blind my eyes with it? And I will restore it to you.
And they said, Thou have not defrauded us, nor oppressed us, neither have thou taken anything of any man's hand.
And he said to them, Jehovah is witness against you,  his anointed is witness this day, that ye have not found anything in my hand. And they said, He is witness.
And Samuel said to the people, It is Jehovah who appointed Moses and Aaron,  who brought your fathers up out of the land of Egypt.
Now therefore stand still that I may plead with you before Jehovah concerning all the righteous acts of Jehovah, which he did to you and to your fathers.
When Jacob had come into Egypt,  your fathers cried to Jehovah, then Jehovah sent Moses and Aaron who brought forth your fathers out of Egypt,  made them to dwell in this place.
But they forgot Jehovah their God,  he sold them into the hand of Sisera, captain of the army of Hazor,  into the hand of the Philistines,  into the hand of the king of Moab,  they fought against them.
And they cried to Jehovah,  said, We have sinned because we have forsaken Jehovah,  have served the Baalim and the Ashtaroth,  now deliver us out of the hand of our enemies,  we will serve thee.
And Jehovah sent Jerubbaal,  Bedan,  Jephthah,  Samuel,  delivered you out of the hand of your enemies on every side,  ye dwelt in safety.
And when ye saw that Nahash the king of the sons of Ammon came against you, ye said to me, No,  a king shall reign over us, when Jehovah your God was your king.
Now therefore behold the king whom ye have chosen,  whom ye have asked for. And, behold, Jehovah has set a king over you.
If ye will fear Jehovah,  serve him,  hearken to his voice,  not rebel against the commandment of Jehovah, then both ye and also the king who reigns over you shall be followers of Jehovah your God.
But if ye will not hearken to the voice of Jehovah,  rebel against the commandment of Jehovah, then the hand of Jehovah will be against you as it was against your fathers.
Now therefore stand still and see this great thing, which Jehovah will do before your eyes.
Is it not wheat harvest today? I will call to Jehovah that he may send thunder and rain,  ye shall know and see that your wickedness is great, which ye have done in the sight of Jehovah in asking a king for you.
So Samuel called to Jehovah,  Jehovah sent thunder and rain that day. And all the people greatly feared Jehovah and Samuel.
And all the people said to Samuel, Pray for thy servants to Jehovah thy God that we not die, for we have added to all our sins this evil, to ask a king for us.
And Samuel said to the people, Fear not. Ye have indeed done all this evil, yet turn not aside from following Jehovah,  serve Jehovah with all your heart.
And turn ye not aside after vain things which cannot profit nor deliver, for they are vain.
For Jehovah will not forsake his people for his great name's sake, because it has pleased Jehovah to make you a people to himself.
Moreover as for me, far be it from me that I should sin against Jehovah in ceasing to pray for you. But I will instruct you in the good and the right way.
Only fear Jehovah,  serve him in truth with all your heart, for consider what great things he has done for you.
But if ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed, both ye and your king.
Saul was  years old when he began to reign. And when he had reigned two years over Israel,
Saul chose for him three thousand men of Israel, of which two thousand were with Saul in Michmash,  on the mount of Bethel,  a thousand were with Jonathan in Gibeah of Benjamin,  the rest of the people he sent every man to his tent.
And Jonathan smote the garrison of the Philistines that was in Geba,  the Philistines heard of it. And Saul blew the trumpet throughout all the land, saying, Let the Hebrews hear.
And all Israel heard say that Saul had smitten the garrison of the Philistines,  also that Israel was had in abomination with the Philistines. And the people were gathered together after Saul to Gilgal.
And the Philistines assembled themselves together to fight with Israel: thirty thousand chariots,  six thousand horsemen,  people as the sand which is on the sea-shore in multitude. And they came up,  encamped in Michmash, eastward of Beth-aven.
When the men of Israel saw that they were in a strait (for the people were distressed), then the people hid themselves in caves,  in thickets,  in rocks,  in coverts,  in pits.
Now some of the Hebrews had gone over the Jordan to the land of Gad and Gilead,  as for Saul, he was yet in Gilgal,  all the people followed him trembling.
And he tarried seven days, according to the set time that Samuel had appointed,  Samuel did not come to Gilgal,  the people were scattered from him.
And Saul said, Bring here the burnt offering to me,  the peace offerings. And he offered the burnt offering.
And it came to pass that, as soon as he had made an end of offering the burnt offering, behold, Samuel came,  Saul went out to meet him, that he might salute him.
And Samuel said, What have thou done? And Saul said, Because I saw that the people were scattered from me,  that thou did not come within the days appointed,  that the Philistines assembled themselves together at Michmash,
therefore I said, Now the Philistines will come down upon me to Gilgal,  I have not entreated the favor of Jehovah. I forced myself therefore,  offered the burnt offering.
And Samuel said to Saul, Thou have done foolishly. Thou have not kept the commandment of Jehovah thy God, which he commanded thee. For now Jehovah would have established thy kingdom upon Israel forever,
but now thy kingdom shall not continue. Jehovah has sought for him a man after his own heart,  Jehovah has appointed him to be prince over his people, because thou have not kept that which Jehovah commanded thee.
And Samuel arose,  got up from Gilgal to Gibeah of Benjamin. And Saul numbered the people who were present with him, about six hundred men.
And Saul,  Jonathan his son,  the people that were present with them, abode in Geba of Benjamin,  the Philistines encamped in Michmash.
And the spoilers came out of the camp of the Philistines in three companies. One company turned to the way that leads to Ophrah, to the land of Shual,
and another company turned the way to Beth-horon,  another company turned the way of the border that looks down upon the valley of Zeboim toward the wilderness.
Now there was no blacksmith found throughout all the land of Israel, for the Philistines said, Lest the Hebrews make for them swords or spears,
but all the Israelites went down to the Philistines to sharpen every man his share,  his coulter,  his axe,  his mattock.
Yet they had a file for the mattocks,  for the coulters,  for the forks,  for the axes,  to set the goads.
So it came to pass in the day of battle, that there was neither sword nor spear found in the hand of any of the people who were with Saul and Jonathan. But with Saul and with Jonathan his son there was found.
And the garrison of the Philistines went out to the pass of Michmash.
Now it fell upon a day that Jonathan the son of Saul said to the young man who bore his armor, Come,  let us go over to the Philistines' garrison that is on yonder side. But he did not tell his father.
And Saul abode in the outermost part of Gibeah under the pomegranate tree which is in Migron. And the people who were with him were about six hundred men,
and Ahijah, the son of Ahitub, Ichabod's brother, the son of Phinehas, the son of Eli, the priest of Jehovah in Shiloh, wearing an ephod. And the people did not know that Jonathan was gone.
And between the passes by which Jonathan sought to go over to the Philistines' garrison, there was a rocky crag on the one side,  a rocky crag on the other side. And the name of the one was Bozez,  the name of the other Seneh.
The one crag rose up on the north in front of Michmash,  the other on the south in front of Geba.
And Jonathan said to the young man who bore his armor, Come,  let us go over to the garrison of these uncircumcised. It may be that Jehovah will work for us, for there is no limitation to Jehovah to save by many or by few.
And his armor bearer said to him, Do all that is in thy heart. Turn thee, behold, I am with thee according to thy heart.
Then Jonathan said, Behold, we will pass over to the men,  we will disclose ourselves to them.
If they say thus to us, Tarry until we come to you, then we will stand still in our place,  will not go up to them.
But if they say thus, Come up to us, then we will go up, for Jehovah has delivered them into our hand,  this shall be the sign to us.
And both of them disclosed themselves to the garrison of the Philistines. And the Philistines said, Behold, the Hebrews come forth out of the holes where they had hid themselves.
And the men of the garrison answered Jonathan and his armor bearer,  said, Come up to us,  we will show you a thing. And Jonathan said to his armor bearer, Come up after me, for Jehovah has delivered them into the hand of Israel.
And Jonathan climbed up upon his hands and upon his feet,  his armor bearer after him. And they fell before Jonathan,  his armor bearer killed them after him.
And that first slaughter, which Jonathan and his armor bearer made, was about twenty men, within as it were half a furrow's length in an acre of land.
And there was a trembling in the camp, in the field,  among all the people. The garrison,  the spoilers, they also trembled. And the earth quaked, so there was an exceedingly great trembling.
And the watchmen of Saul in Gibeah of Benjamin looked, , behold, the multitude melted away,  they went here and there.
Then Saul said to the people who were with him, Number now,  see who has gone from us. And when they had numbered, behold, Jonathan and his armor bearer were not there.
And Saul said to Ahijah, Bring here the ark of God. For the ark of God was there at that time with the sons of Israel.
And it came to pass, while Saul talked to the priest, that the tumult that was in the camp of the Philistines went on and increased. And Saul said to the priest, Withdraw thy hand.
And Saul and all the people who were with him were gathered together,  came to the battle. And, behold, every man's sword was against his fellow,  there was a very great discomfiture.
Now the Hebrews who were with the Philistines as formerly,  who went up with them into the camp, from the country round about, even they also turned to be with the Israelites who were with Saul and Jonathan.
Likewise all the men of Israel who had hid themselves in the hill-country of Ephraim, when they heard that the Philistines fled, even they also followed close after them in the battle.
So Jehovah saved Israel that day,  the battle passed over by Beth-aven.
And the men of Israel were distressed that day, for Saul had adjured the people, saying, Cursed be the man who eats any food until it be evening,  I be avenged on my enemies. So none of the people tasted food.
And all the people came into the forest,  there was honey upon the ground.
And when the people came to the forest, behold, the honey dropped,  no man put his hand to his mouth, for the people feared the oath.
But Jonathan heard not when his father charged the people with the oath, therefore he put forth the end of the rod that was in his hand,  dipped it in the honeycomb,  put his hand to his mouth,  his eyes were enlightened.
Then one of the people answered,  said, Thy father strictly charged the people with an oath, saying, Cursed be the man who eats food this day,  the people were faint.
Then Jonathan said, My father has troubled the land. See, I pray you, how my eyes have been enlightened because I tasted a little of this honey.
How much more, if haply the people had eaten freely today of the spoil of their enemies which they found? For now there has been no great slaughter among the Philistines.
And they smote of the Philistines that day from Michmash to Aijalon. And the people were very faint,
and the people flew upon the spoil,  took sheep,  oxen,  calves,  killed them on the ground. And the people ate them with the blood.
Then they told Saul, saying, Behold, the people sin against Jehovah, in that they eat with the blood. And he said, ye have dealt treacherously. Roll a great stone to me this day.
And Saul said, Disperse yourselves among the people,  say to them, Bring me here every man his ox,  every man his sheep,  kill them here,  eat. And sin not against Jehovah in eating with the blood. And all the people brought every man his ox with him that night,  killed them there.
And Saul built an altar to Jehovah; the same was the first altar that he built to Jehovah.
And Saul said, Let us go down after the Philistines by night,  take spoil among them until the morning light,  let us not leave a man of them. And they said, Do whatever seems good to thee. Then the priest said, Let us draw near here to God.
And Saul asked counsel of God, Shall I go down after the Philistines? Will thou deliver them into the hand of Israel? But he did not answer him that day.
And Saul said, Draw near here, all ye chiefs of the people,  know and see how this sin has been this day.
For, as Jehovah lives, who saves Israel, though it be in Jonathan my son, he shall surely die. But there was not a man among all the people who answered him.
Then he said to all Israel, Be ye on one side,  I and Jonathan my son will be on the other side. And the people said to Saul, Do what seems good to thee.
Therefore Saul said to Jehovah, the God of Israel, Show the right. And Jonathan and Saul were taken by lot,  the people escaped.
And Saul said, Cast lots between me and Jonathan my son. And Jonathan was taken.
Then Saul said to Jonathan, Tell me what thou have done. And Jonathan told him,  said, I did certainly taste a little honey with the end of the rod that was in my hand. And, lo, I must die.
And Saul said, God do so and more also, for thou shall surely die, Jonathan.
And the people said to Saul, Shall Jonathan die, who has wrought this great salvation in Israel? Far from it. As Jehovah lives, there shall not one hair of his head fall to the ground, for he has wrought with God this day. So the people rescued Jonathan, that he did not die.
Then Saul went up from following the Philistines,  the Philistines went to their own place.
Now when Saul had taken the kingdom over Israel, he fought against all his enemies on every side, against Moab,  against the sons of Ammon,  against Edom,  against the kings of Zobah,  against the Philistines. And wherever he turned himself, he put them to the worse.
And he did valiantly,  smote the Amalekites,  delivered Israel out of the hands of those who despoiled them.
Now the sons of Saul were Jonathan,  Ishvi,  Malchishua. And the names of his two daughters were these: the name of the firstborn Merab,  the name of the younger Michal.
And the name of Saul's wife was Ahinoam the daughter of Ahimaaz. And the name of the captain of his army was Abner the son of Ner, Saul's uncle.
And Kish was the father of Saul,  Ner the father of Abner was the son of Abiel.
And there was great war against the Philistines all the days of Saul. And when Saul saw any mighty man, or any valiant man, he took him to him.
And Samuel said to Saul, Jehovah sent me to anoint thee to be king over his people, over Israel. Now therefore hearken thou to the voice of the words of Jehovah.
Thus says Jehovah of hosts, I have remembered that which Amalek did to Israel, how he set himself against him in the way when he came up out of Egypt.
Now go and smite Amalek,  utterly destroy all that they have,  spare them not,  kill both man and woman, infant and suckling, ox and sheep, camel and donkey.
And Saul summoned the people,  numbered them in Telaim, two hundred thousand footmen,  ten thousand men of Judah.
And Saul came to the city of Amalek,  laid wait in the valley.
And Saul said to the Kenites, Go, depart, get you down from among the Amalekites, lest I destroy you with them, for ye showed kindness to all the sons of Israel when they came up out of Egypt. So the Kenites departed from among the Amalekites.
And Saul smote the Amalekites, from Havilah as thou go to Shur, that is before Egypt.
And he took Agag the king of the Amalekites alive,  utterly destroyed all the people with the edge of the sword.
But Saul and the people spared Agag,  the best of the sheep,  of the oxen,  of the fatlings,  the lambs,  all that was good,  would not utterly destroy them. But everything that was vile and refuse, that they destroyed utterly.
Then the word of Jehovah came to Samuel, saying,
I regret that I have set up Saul to be king, for he has turned back from following me,  has not performed my commandments. And Samuel was angry,  he cried out to Jehovah all night.
And Samuel rose early to meet Saul in the morning,  it was told Samuel, saying, Saul came to Carmel, , behold, he set up for him a monument,  turned,  passed on,  went down to Gilgal.
And Samuel came to Saul. And Saul said to him, Blessed be thou of Jehovah. I have performed the commandment of Jehovah.
And Samuel said, What then means this bleating of the sheep in my ears,  the lowing of the oxen which I hear?
And Saul said, They have brought them from the Amalekites, for the people spared the best of the sheep and of the oxen to sacrifice to Jehovah thy God,  the rest we have utterly destroyed.
Then Samuel said to Saul, Stop,  I will tell thee what Jehovah has said to me this night. And he said to him, Say on.
And Samuel said, Though thou were little in thine own sight, were thou not made the head of the tribes of Israel? And Jehovah anointed thee king over Israel.
And Jehovah sent thee on a journey,  said, Go,  utterly destroy the sinners, the Amalekites,  fight against them until they be consumed.
Why then did thou not obey the voice of Jehovah,  did fly upon the spoil,  did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah?
And Saul said to Samuel, Yes, I have obeyed the voice of Jehovah,  have gone the way which Jehovah sent me,  have brought Agag the king of Amalek,  have utterly destroyed the Amalekites.
But the people took of the spoil, sheep and oxen, the chief of the devoted things, to sacrifice to Jehovah thy God in Gilgal.
And Samuel said, Has Jehovah as great delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of Jehovah? Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice,  to hearken than the fat of rams.
For rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft,  stubbornness is as idolatry and teraphim. Because thou have rejected the word of Jehovah, he has also rejected thee from being king.
And Saul said to Samuel, I have sinned, for I have transgressed the commandment of Jehovah,  thy words, because I feared the people,  obeyed their voice.
Now therefore, I pray thee, pardon my sin,  turn again with me that I may worship Jehovah.
And Samuel said to Saul, I will not return with thee, for thou have rejected the word of Jehovah,  Jehovah has rejected thee from being king over Israel.
And as Samuel turned about to go away, Saul laid hold upon the skirt of his robe,  it tore.
And Samuel said to him, Jehovah has torn the kingdom of Israel from thee this day,  has given it to a neighbor of thine, who is better than thou.
And also the Strength of Israel will not lie nor repent, for he is not a man that he should repent.
Then he said, I have sinned. Yet honor me now, I pray thee, before the elders of my people,  before Israel,  turn again with me, that I may worship Jehovah thy God.
So Samuel turned again after Saul,  Saul worshiped Jehovah.
Then Samuel said, Bring ye here to me Agag the king of the Amalekites. And Agag came to him cheerfully. And Agag said, Surely the bitterness of death is past.
And Samuel said, As thy sword has made women childless, so shall thy mother be childless among women. And Samuel hewed Agag in pieces before Jehovah in Gilgal.
Then Samuel went to Ramah,  Saul went up to his house to Gibeah of Saul.
And Samuel came no more to see Saul until the day of his death, for Samuel mourned for Saul,  Jehovah regretted that he had made Saul king over Israel.
And Jehovah said to Samuel, How long will thou mourn for Saul, since I have rejected him from being king over Israel? Fill thy horn with oil,  go. I will send thee to Jesse the Bethlehemite, for I have provided for me a king among his sons.
And Samuel said, How do I go? If Saul hears it, he will kill me. And Jehovah said, Take a heifer with thee,  say, I have come to sacrifice to Jehovah.
And call Jesse to the sacrifice,  I will show thee what thou shall do. And thou shall anoint to me him whom I name to thee.
And Samuel did that which Jehovah spoke,  came to Bethlehem. And the elders of the city came to meet him trembling,  said, Do thou come peaceably?
And he said, Peaceably; I have come to sacrifice to Jehovah. Sanctify yourselves,  come with me to the sacrifice. And he sanctified Jesse and his sons,  called them to the sacrifice.
And it came to pass, when they came, that he looked on Eliab,  said, Surely Jehovah's anointed is before him.
But Jehovah said to Samuel, Do not look on his countenance, or on the height of his stature, because I have rejected him. For Jehovah sees not as man sees, for man looks on the outward appearance,  Jehovah looks on the heart.
Then Jesse called Abinadab,  made him pass before Samuel. And he said, Neither has Jehovah chosen this man.
Then Jesse made Shammah to pass by. And he said, Neither has Jehovah chosen this man.
And Jesse made seven of his sons to pass before Samuel. And Samuel said to Jesse, Jehovah has not chosen these men.
And Samuel said to Jesse, Are all thy sons here? And he said, There remains yet the youngest, , behold, he is keeping the sheep. And Samuel said to Jesse, Send and fetch him, for we will not sit down till he comes here.
And he sent,  brought him in. Now he was ruddy,  of a beautiful countenance,  fine to look upon. And Jehovah said, Arise, anoint him, for this is he.
Then Samuel took the horn of oil,  anointed him in the midst of his brothers. And the Spirit of Jehovah came mightily upon David from that day forward. So Samuel rose up,  went to Ramah.
Now the Spirit of Jehovah departed from Saul,  an evil spirit from Jehovah troubled him.
And Saul's servants said to him, Behold now, an evil spirit from God troubles thee.
Let our lord now command thy servants, who are before thee, to seek out a man who is a skilful player on the harp. And it shall come to pass, when the evil spirit from God is upon thee, that he shall play with his hand,  thou shall be well.
And Saul said to his servants, Provide for me now a man who can play well,  bring him to me.
Then one of the young men answered,  said, Behold, I have seen a son of Jesse the Bethlehemite who is skilful in playing,  a mighty man of valor,  a man of war,  prudent in speech,  a comely man,  Jehovah is with him.
Therefore Saul sent messengers to Jesse,  said, Send to me David thy son, who is with the sheep.
And Jesse took a donkey with bread,  a bottle of wine,  a kid,  sent them by David his son to Saul.
And David came to Saul,  stood before him. And he loved him greatly,  he became his armor bearer.
And Saul sent to Jesse, saying, Let David, I pray thee, stand before me, for he has found favor in my sight.
And it came to pass, when the spirit from God was upon Saul, that David took the harp,  played with his hand. So Saul was refreshed,  was well,  the evil spirit departed from him.
Now the Philistines gathered their armies together to battle. And they were gathered together at Socoh, which belongs to Judah,  encamped between Socoh and Azekah, in Ephes-dammim.
And Saul and the men of Israel were gathered together,  encamped in the vale of Elah,  set the battle in array against the Philistines.
And the Philistines stood on the mountain on the one side,  Israel stood on the mountain on the other side,  there was a valley between them.
And there went out a champion out of the camp of the Philistines, named Goliath, of Gath, whose height was six cubits and a span.
And he had a helmet of brass upon his head,  he was clad with a coat of mail. And the weight of the coat was five thousand shekels of brass.
And he had greaves of brass upon his legs,  a javelin of brass between his shoulders.
And the staff of his spear was like a weaver's beam,  his spear's head weighed six hundred shekels of iron. And his shield-bearer went before him.
And he stood and cried out to the armies of Israel,  said to them, Why have ye come out to set your battle in array? Am I not a Philistine,  ye servants to Saul? Choose you a man for you,  let him come down to me.
If he is able to fight with me,  kill me, then we will be your servants,  if I prevail against him,  kill him, then ye shall be our servants,  serve us.
And the Philistine said, I defy the armies of Israel this day. Give me a man, that we may fight together.
And when Saul and all Israel heard those words of the Philistine, they were dismayed,  greatly afraid.
Now David was the son of that Ephrathite of Bethlehem-judah, whose name was Jesse. And he had eight sons,  the man was an old man in the days of Saul, stricken in years among men.
And the three eldest sons of Jesse had gone after Saul to the battle. And the names of his three sons who went to the battle were Eliab the firstborn,  next to him Abinadab,  the third Shammah.
And David was the youngest,  the three eldest followed Saul.
Now David went to and fro from Saul to feed his father's sheep at Bethlehem.
And the Philistine drew near morning and evening,  presented himself forty days.
And Jesse said to David his son, Take now for thy brothers an ephah of this parched grain,  these ten loaves,  carry them quickly to the camp to thy brothers.
And bring these ten cheeses to the captain of their thousand. And look how thy brothers fare,  take their pledge.
Now Saul,  they,  all the men of Israel, were in the valley of Elah, fighting with the Philistines.
And David rose up early in the morning,  left the sheep with a keeper,  took,  went as Jesse had commanded him. And he came to the place of the wagons as the army which was going forth to the fight shouted for the battle.
And Israel and the Philistines put the battle in array, army against army.
And David left his baggage in the hand of the keeper of the baggage,  ran to the army,  came and saluted his brothers.
And as he talked with them, behold, there came up the champion, the Philistine of Gath, Goliath by name, out of the ranks of the Philistines,  spoke according to the same words,  David heard them.
And all the men of Israel, when they saw the man, fled from him,  were greatly afraid.
And the men of Israel said, Have ye seen this man who has come up? Surely to defy Israel he has come up. And it shall be, that the man who kills him, the king will enrich him with great riches,  will give him his daughter,  make his father's house free in Israel.
And David spoke to the men who stood by him, saying, What shall be done to the man who kills this Philistine,  takes away the reproach from Israel? For who is this uncircumcised Philistine that he should defy the armies of the living God?
And the people answered him after this manner, saying, So shall it be done to the man that kills him.
And Eliab his eldest brother heard when he spoke to the men. And Eliab's anger was kindled against David,  he said, Why have thou come down? And with whom have thou left those few sheep in the wilderness? I know thy pride,  the mischief of thy heart, for thou have come down that thou might see the battle.
And David said, What have I now done? Is there not a cause?
And he turned away from him toward another,  spoke after the same manner,  the people answered him again after the former manner.
And when the words were heard which David spoke, they repeated them before Saul,  he sent for him.
And David said to Saul, Let no man's heart fail because of him. Thy servant will go and fight with this Philistine.
And Saul said to David, Thou are not able to go against this Philistine to fight with him, for thou are but a youth,  he a man of war from his youth.
And David said to Saul, Thy servant was keeping his father's sheep,  when there came a lion, or a bear,  took a lamb out of the flock,
I went out after him,  smote him,  delivered it out of his mouth. And when he arose against me, I caught him by his beard,  smote him,  killed him.
Thy servant smote both the lion and the bear,  this uncircumcised Philistine shall be as one of them, seeing he has defied the armies of the living God.
And David said, Jehovah who delivered me out of the paw of the lion,  out of the paw of the bear, he will deliver me out of the hand of this Philistine. And Saul said to David, Go,  Jehovah shall be with thee.
And Saul clad David with his apparel,  he put a helmet of brass upon his head,  he clad him with a coat of mail.
And David girded his sword upon his apparel,  he attempted to go, for he had not tested them. And David said to Saul, I cannot go with these, for I have not tested them. And David put them off of him.
And he took his staff in his hand,  chose for him five smooth stones out of the brook,  put them in the shepherd's bag which he had, even in his wallet. And his sling was in his hand,  he drew near to the Philistine.
And the Philistine came on and drew near to David,  the man who bore the shield went before him.
And when the Philistine looked about,  saw David, he disdained him, for he was but a youth,  ruddy,  of a fair countenance.
And the Philistine said to David, Am I a dog, that thou come to me with sticks? And the Philistine cursed David by his gods.
And the Philistine said to David, Come to me,  I will give thy flesh to the birds of the heavens,  to the beasts of the field.
Then David said to the Philistine, Thou come to me with a sword,  with a spear,  with a javelin,  I come to thee in the name of Jehovah of hosts, the God of the armies of Israel, whom thou have defied.
This day Jehovah will deliver thee into my hand,  I will smite thee,  take thy head from off thee. And I will give the dead bodies of the armies of the Philistines this day to the birds of the heavens,  to the wild beasts of the earth, that all the earth may know that there is a God in Israel,
and that all this assembly may know that Jehovah saves not with sword and spear. For the battle is Jehovah's,  he will give you into our hand.
And it came to pass, when the Philistine arose,  came and drew near to meet David, that David hastened,  ran toward the army to meet the Philistine.
And David put his hand in his bag,  took from there a stone,  slung it,  smote the Philistine in his forehead. And the stone sank into his forehead,  he fell upon his face to the earth.
So David prevailed over the Philistine with a sling and with a stone,  smote the Philistine,  killed him. But there was no sword in the hand of David.
Then David ran,  stood over the Philistine,  took his sword,  drew it out of the sheath of it,  killed him,  cut off his head with it. And when the Philistines saw that their champion was dead, they fled.
And the men of Israel and of Judah arose,  shouted,  pursued the Philistines until thou come to Gai,  to the gates of Ekron. And the wounded of the Philistines fell down by the way to Shaaraim, even to Gath,  to Ekron.
And the sons of Israel returned from chasing after the Philistines,  they plundered their camp.
And David took the head of the Philistine,  brought it to Jerusalem,  he put his armor in his tent.
And when Saul saw David go forth against the Philistine, he said to Abner, the captain of the army, Abner, whose son is this youth? And Abner said, As thy soul lives, O king, I cannot tell.
And the king said, Inquire thou whose son the stripling is.
And as David returned from the slaughter of the Philistine, Abner took him,  brought him before Saul with the head of the Philistine in his hand.
And Saul said to him, Whose son are thou, young man? And David answered, I am the son of thy servant Jesse the Bethlehemite.
And it came to pass, when he had made an end of speaking to Saul, that the soul of Jonathan was knit with the soul of David,  Jonathan loved him as his own soul.
And Saul took him that day,  would no more let him go home to his father's house.
Then Jonathan and David made a covenant, because he loved him as his own soul.
And Jonathan stripped himself of the robe that was upon him,  gave it to David,  his apparel, even to his sword,  to his bow,  to his belt.
And David went out wherever Saul sent him,  behaved himself wisely. And Saul set him over the men of war,  it was good in the sight of all the people,  also in the sight of Saul's servants.
And it came to pass as they came, when David returned from the slaughter of the Philistine, that the women came out of all the cities of Israel, singing and dancing, to meet king Saul, with timbrels, with joy,  with instruments of music.
And the women sang one to another as they played,  said, Saul has slain his thousands,  David his ten thousands.
And Saul was very angry,  this saying displeased him,  he said, They have ascribed to David ten thousands,  to me they have ascribed but thousands,  what can he have more but the kingdom?
And Saul eyed David from that day and forward.
And it came to pass on the morrow, that an evil spirit from God came mightily upon Saul,  he prophesied in the midst of the house. And David played with his hand, as he did day by day,  Saul had his spear in his hand.
And Saul cast the spear, for he said, I will smite David even to the wall. And David turned away from his presence twice.
And Saul was afraid of David because Jehovah was with him,  was departed from Saul.
Therefore Saul removed him from him,  made him his captain over a thousand,  he went out and came in before the people.
And David behaved himself wisely in all his ways,  Jehovah was with him.
And when Saul saw that he behaved himself very wisely, he was afraid of him.
But all Israel and Judah loved David, for he went out and came in before them.
And Saul said to David, Behold, my elder daughter Merab, I will give her to thee for a wife. Only be thou valiant for me,  fight Jehovah's battles. For Saul said, Let not my hand be upon him,  let the hand of the Philistines be upon him.
And David said to Saul, Who am I,  what is my life, or my father's family in Israel, that I should be son-in-law to the king?
But it came to pass at the time when Merab, Saul's daughter, should have been given to David, that she was given to Adriel the Meholathite to wife.
And Michal, Saul's daughter, loved David,  they told Saul,  the thing pleased him.
And Saul said, I will give him her, that she may be a snare to him,  that the hand of the Philistines may be against him. Therefore Saul said to David, Thou shall this day be my son-in-law a second time.
And Saul commanded his servants, saying, Converse with David secretly,  say, Behold, the king has delight in thee,  all his servants love thee. Now therefore be the king's son-in-law.
And Saul's servants spoke those words in the ears of David. And David said, Does it seem to you a light thing to be the king's son-in-law, seeing that I am a poor man,  lightly esteemed?
And the servants of Saul told him, saying, On this manner David spoke.
And Saul said, Thus shall ye say to David, The king does not desire any dowry,  a hundred foreskins of the Philistines, to be avenged of the king's enemies. Now Saul thought to make David fall by the hand of the Philistines.
And when his servants told David these words, it pleased David well to be the king's son-in-law. And the days were not expired.
And David arose and went, he and his men,  killed of the Philistines two hundred men. And David brought their foreskins,  they gave them in full number to the king, that he might be the king's son-in-law. And Saul gave him Michal his daughter to wife.
And Saul saw and knew that Jehovah was with David,  Michal, Saul's daughter, loved him.
And Saul was yet the more afraid of David,  Saul was David's enemy continually.
Then the rulers of the Philistines went forth,  it came to pass, as often as they went forth, that David behaved himself more wisely than all the servants of Saul, so that his name was very precious.
And Saul spoke to Jonathan his son,  to all his servants, that they should kill David. But Jonathan, Saul's son, delighted much in David.
And Jonathan told David, saying, Saul my father seeks to kill thee. Now therefore, I pray thee, take heed to thyself in the morning,  abide in a secret place,  hide thyself.
And I will go out and stand beside my father in the field where thou are,  I will converse with my father of thee,  if I see anything, I will tell thee.
And Jonathan spoke good of David to Saul his father,  said to him, Let not the king sin against his servant, against David, because he has not sinned against thee,  because his works have been very good toward thee.
For he put his life in his hand,  smote the Philistine,  Jehovah wrought a great victory for all Israel. Thou saw it,  rejoiced. Why then will thou sin against innocent blood, to kill David without a cause?
And Saul hearkened to the voice of Jonathan. And Saul swore, As Jehovah lives, he shall not be put to death.
And Jonathan called David,  Jonathan showed him all those things. And Jonathan brought David to Saul,  he was in his presence as beforetime.
And there was war again. And David went out,  fought with the Philistines,  killed them with a great slaughter,  they fled before him.
And an evil spirit from Jehovah was upon Saul as he sat in his house with his spear in his hand,  David was playing with his hand.
And Saul sought to smite David even to the wall with the spear,  he slipped away out of Saul's presence,  he smote the spear into the wall. And David fled,  escaped that night.
And Saul sent messengers to David's house, to watch him,  to kill him in the morning. And Michal, David's wife, told him, saying, If thou save not thy life tonight, tomorrow thou will be slain.
So Michal let David down through the window,  he went,  fled,  escaped.
And Michal took the teraphim,  laid it in the bed,  put a pillow of goats' hair at the head of it,  covered it with the clothes.
And when Saul sent messengers to take David, she said, He is sick.
And Saul sent the messengers to see David, saying, Bring him up to me in the bed, that I may kill him.
And when the messengers came in, behold, the teraphim was in the bed, with the pillow of goats' hair at the head of it.
And Saul said to Michal, Why have thou deceived me thus,  let my enemy go, so that he is escaped? And Michal answered Saul, He said to me, Let me go. Why should I kill thee?
Now David fled,  escaped,  came to Samuel to Ramah,  told him all that Saul had done to him. And he and Samuel went and dwelt in Naioth.
And it was told Saul, saying, Behold, David is at Naioth in Ramah.
And Saul sent messengers to take David. And when they saw the company of the prophets prophesying,  Samuel standing as head over them, the Spirit of God came upon the messengers of Saul,  they also prophesied.
And when it was told Saul, he sent other messengers,  they also prophesied. And Saul sent messengers again the third time,  they also prophesied.
Then he also went to Ramah,  came to the great well that is in Secu. And he asked and said, Where are Samuel and David? And one said, Behold, they are at Naioth in Ramah.
And he went there to Naioth in Ramah,  the Spirit of God came upon him also,  he went on,  prophesied until he came to Naioth in Ramah.
And he also stripped off his clothes,  he also prophesied before Samuel,  lay down naked all that day and all that night. Therefore they say, Is Saul also among the prophets?
And David fled from Naioth in Ramah,  came and said before Jonathan, What have I done? What is my iniquity,  what is my sin before thy father, that he seeks my life?
And he said to him, Far from it. Thou shall not die. Behold, my father does nothing either great or small,  that he discloses it to me,  why should my father hide this thing from me? It is not so.
And David swore moreover,  said, Thy father knows well that I have found favor in thine eyes,  he says, Let not Jonathan know this, lest he be grieved. But truly as Jehovah lives,  as thy soul lives, there is but a step between me and death.
Then Jonathan said to David, Whatever thy soul desires, I will even do it for thee.
And David said to Jonathan, Behold, tomorrow is the new moon,  I should not fail to sit with the king to eat. But let me go that I may hide myself in the field to the third day at evening.
If thy father misses me at all, then say, David earnestly asked leave of me that he might run to Bethlehem his city, for it is the yearly sacrifice there for all the family.
If he says thus, It is well. Thy servant shall have peace. But if he is angry, then know that evil is determined by him.
Therefore deal kindly with thy servant, for thou have brought thy servant into a covenant of Jehovah with thee. But if there be in me iniquity, kill me thyself, for why should thou bring me to thy father?
And Jonathan said, Far be it from thee, for if I should at all know that evil were determined by my father to come upon thee, then would I not tell it to thee?
Then David said to Jonathan, Who shall tell me if perchance thy father answers thee roughly?
And Jonathan said to David, Come,  let us go out into the field. And they went out both of them into the field.
And Jonathan said to David, Jehovah, the God of Israel-when I have sounded my father about this time tomorrow, or the third day, behold, if there be good toward David, shall I not then send to thee,  disclose it to thee?
Jehovah do so to Jonathan,  more also, should it please my father to do thee evil, if I not disclose it to thee,  send thee away that thou may go in peace. And Jehovah be with thee as he has been with my father.
And thou shall not only show me the loving kindness of Jehovah, while I yet live, that I not die,
but also thou shall not cut off thy kindness from my house forever. No, not when Jehovah has cut off the enemies of David every one from the face of the earth.
So Jonathan made a covenant with the house of David, saying, And Jehovah will require it at the hand of David's enemies.
And Jonathan caused David to swear again, for the love that he had to him. For he loved him as he loved his own soul.
Then Jonathan said to him, Tomorrow is the new moon,  thou will be missed because thy seat will be empty.
And when thou have stayed three days, thou shall go down quickly,  come to the place where thou hid thyself when the business was in hand,  shall remain by the stone Ezel.
And I will shoot three arrows on the side of it, as though I shot at a mark.
And, behold, I will send the lad, saying, Go, find the arrows. If I say to the lad, Behold, the arrows are on this side of thee, take them,  come, for there is peace to thee and no hurt, as Jehovah lives.
But if I say thus to the boy, Behold, the arrows are beyond thee, go thy way, for Jehovah has sent thee away.
And concerning the matter which thou and I have spoken of, behold, Jehovah is between thee and me forever.
So David hid himself in the field. And when the new moon came, the king sat down to eat food.
And the king sat upon his seat, as at other times, even upon the seat by the wall,  Jonathan stood up,  Abner sat by Saul's side,  David's place was empty.
Nevertheless Saul spoke nothing that day, for he thought, Something has befallen him. He is not clean. Surely he is not clean.
And it came to pass on the morrow after the new moon, which was the second day, that David's place was empty. And Saul said to Jonathan his son, Why has the son of Jesse not come in to the food, neither yesterday, nor today?
And Jonathan answered Saul, David earnestly asked leave of me to go to Bethlehem.
And he said, Let me go, I pray thee, for our family has a sacrifice in the city,  my brother, he has commanded me. And now, if I have found favor in thine eyes, let me get away, I pray thee,  see my brothers. Therefore he has not come to the king's table.
Then Saul's anger was kindled against Jonathan,  he said to him, Thou son of a perverse rebellious woman, do I not know that thou have chosen the son of Jesse to thine own shame,  to the shame of thy mother's nakedness?
For as long as the son of Jesse lives upon the ground, thou shall not be established, nor thy kingdom. Therefore now send and fetch him to me, for he shall surely die.
And Jonathan answered Saul his father,  said to him, Why should he be put to death? What has he done?
And Saul cast his spear at him to smite him. By this Jonathan knew that it was determined by his father to put David to death.
So Jonathan arose from the table in fierce anger,  ate no food the second day of the month, for he was grieved for David because his father had done him shame.
And it came to pass in the morning, that Jonathan went out into the field at the time appointed with David,  a little lad with him.
And he said to his lad, Run, now find the arrows which I shoot. And as the lad ran, he shot an arrow beyond him.
And when the lad was come to the place of the arrow which Jonathan had shot, Jonathan cried after the lad,  said, Is not the arrow beyond thee?
And Jonathan cried after the lad, Make speed, haste, stay not. And Jonathan's lad gathered up the arrows,  came to his master.
But the lad knew nothing. Only Jonathan and David knew the matter.
And Jonathan gave his weapons to his lad,  said to him, Go, carry them to the city.
And as soon as the lad was gone, David arose out of a place toward the South,  fell on his face to the ground,  bowed himself three times. And they kissed each other,  wept one with another until David surpassed him.
And Jonathan said to David, Go in peace, inasmuch as we have sworn both of us in the name of Jehovah, saying, Jehovah shall be between me and thee,  between my seed and thy seed, forever. And he arose and departed,  Jonathan went into the city.
Then David came to Nob to Ahimelech the priest. And Ahimelech came to meet David trembling,  said to him, Why are thou alone,  no man with thee?
And David said to Ahimelech the priest, The king has commanded me a business,  has said to me, Let no man know anything of the business about which I send thee,  what I have commanded thee,  I have assigned the young men to such and such a place.
Now therefore what is under thy hand? Give me five loaves of bread in my hand, or whatever there is present.
And the priest answered David,  said, There is no common bread under my hand,  there is holy bread. If only the young men have kept themselves from women.
And David answered the priest,  said to him, Of a truth women have been kept from us about these three days. When I came out the vessels of the young men were holy, though it was but a common journey. How much more then today shall their vessels be holy?
So the priest gave him holy bread, for there was no bread there but the showbread that was taken from before Jehovah to put hot bread in the day when it was taken away.
Now a certain man of the servants of Saul was there that day, detained before Jehovah. And his name was Doeg the Edomite, the foremost of the herdsmen who belonged to Saul.
And David said to Ahimelech, And is there not here under thy hand spear or sword? For I have neither brought my sword nor my weapons with me, because the king's business required haste.
And the priest said, The sword of Goliath the Philistine, whom thou killed in the vale of Elah, behold, it is here wrapped in a cloth behind the ephod. If thou will take that, take it, for there is no other except that here. And David said, There is none like that. Give it to me.
And David arose,  fled that day for fear of Saul,  went to Achish the king of Gath.
And the servants of Achish said to him, Is not this David the king of the land? Did they not sing one to another of him in dances, saying, Saul has slain his thousands,  David his ten thousands?
And David laid up these words in his heart,  was very afraid of Achish the king of Gath.
And he changed his behavior before them,  feigned himself mad in their hands,  scrabbled on the doors of the gate,  let his spittle fall down upon his beard.
Then Achish said to his servants, Lo, ye see the man is mad. Why then have ye brought him to me?
Do I lack madmen, that ye have brought this fellow to play the madman in my presence? Shall this fellow come into my house?
David therefore departed from there,  escaped to the cave of Adullam. And when his brothers and all his father's house heard it, they went down there to him.
And every man who was in distress,  every man who was in debt,  every man who was discontented, gathered themselves to him,  he became captain over them. And there were with him about four hundred men.
And David went from there to Mizpeh of Moab,  he said to the king of Moab, Let my father and my mother, I pray thee, come forth,  be with you, till I know what God will do for me.
And he brought them before the king of Moab,  they dwelt with him all the while that David was in the stronghold.
And the prophet Gad said to David, Abide not in the stronghold. Depart,  get thee into the land of Judah. Then David departed,  came into the forest of Hereth.
And Saul heard that David was discovered,  the men who were with him. Now Saul was sitting in Gibeah, under the tamarisk tree in Ramah with his spear in his hand,  all his servants were standing about him.
And Saul said to his servants who stood about him, Hear now, ye Benjamites. Will the son of Jesse give every one of you fields and vineyards? Will he make you all captains of thousands and captains of hundreds,
that all of you have conspired against me,  there is none who discloses to me when my son makes a league with the son of Jesse? And there is none of you who is sorry for me, or discloses to me that my son has stirred up my servant against me, to lie in wait, as at this day.
Then answered Doeg the Edomite, who stood by the servants of Saul,  said, I saw the son of Jesse coming to Nob, to Ahimelech the son of Ahitub.
And he inquired of Jehovah for him,  gave him food,  gave him the sword of Goliath the Philistine.
Then the king sent to call Ahimelech the priest, the son of Ahitub,  all his father's house, the priests who were in Nob. And they came to the king, all of them.
And Saul said, Hear now, thou son of Ahitub. And he answered, Here I am, my lord.
And Saul said to him, Why have ye conspired against me, thou and the son of Jesse, in that thou have given him bread,  a sword,  have inquired of God for him, that he should rise against me to lie in wait as at this day?
Then Ahimelech answered the king,  said, And who among all thy servants is so faithful as David, who is the king's son-in-law,  is taken into thy council,  is honorable in thy house?
Have I today begun to inquire of God for him? Be it far from me. Let not the king impute anything to his servant, nor to all the house of my father, for thy servant knows nothing of all this, less or more.
And the king said, Thou shall surely die, Ahimelech, thou,  all thy father's house.
And the king said to the guard who stood about him, Turn,  kill the priests of Jehovah, because their hand also is with David,  because they knew that he fled,  did not disclose it to me. But the servants of the king would not put forth their hand to fall upon the priests of Jehovah.
And the king said to Doeg, Turn thou,  fall upon the priests. And Doeg the Edomite turned,  he fell upon the priests,  he killed on that day eighty-five persons who wore a linen ephod.
And Nob, the city of the priests, he smote with the edge of the sword, both men and women, sons and sucklings,  oxen and donkeys and sheep, with the edge of the sword.
And one of the sons of Ahimelech, the son of Ahitub, named Abiathar, escaped,  fled after David.
And Abiathar told David that Saul had slain Jehovah's priests.
And David said to Abiathar, I knew on that day, when Doeg the Edomite was there, that he would surely tell Saul. I have occasioned the death of all the persons of thy father's house.
Abide thou with me. Fear not, for he who seeks my life seeks thy life, for with me thou shall be in safeguard.
And they told David, saying, Behold, the Philistines are fighting against Keilah,  are robbing the threshing-floors.
Therefore David inquired of Jehovah, saying, Shall I go and smite these Philistines? And Jehovah said to David, Go,  smite the Philistines,  save Keilah.
And David's men said to him, Behold, we are afraid here in Judah. How much more then if we go to Keilah against the armies of the Philistines?
Then David inquired of Jehovah yet again. And Jehovah answered him,  said, Arise, go down to Keilah, for I will deliver the Philistines into thy hand.
And David and his men went to Keilah,  fought with the Philistines,  brought away their cattle,  killed them with a great slaughter. So David saved the inhabitants of Keilah.
And it came to pass, when Abiathar the son of Ahimelech fled to David to Keilah, that he came down with an ephod in his hand.
And it was told Saul that David came to Keilah. And Saul said, God has delivered him into my hand, for he is shut in by entering into a town that has gates and bars.
And Saul summoned all the people to war, to go down to Keilah, to besiege David and his men.
And David knew that Saul was devising mischief against him,  he said to Abiathar the priest, Bring here the ephod.
Then said David, O Jehovah, the God of Israel, thy servant has surely heard that Saul seeks to come to Keilah to destroy the city for my sake.
Will the men of Keilah deliver me up into his hand? Will Saul come down as thy servant has heard? O Jehovah, the God of Israel, I beseech thee, tell thy servant. And Jehovah said, He will come down.
Then David said, Will the men of Keilah deliver up me and my men into the hand of Saul? And Jehovah said, They will deliver thee up.
Then David and his men, who were about six hundred, arose and departed out of Keilah,  went wherever they could go. And it was told Saul that David was escaped from Keilah,  he ceased to go forth.
And David abode in the wilderness in the strongholds,  remained in the hill-country in the wilderness of Ziph. And Saul sought him every day,  God did not deliver him into his hand.
And David saw that Saul came out to seek his life,  David was in the wilderness of Ziph in the forest.
And Jonathan, Saul's son, arose,  went to David into the forest,  strengthened his hand in God.
And he said to him, Fear not, for the hand of Saul my father shall not find thee. And thou shall be king over Israel,  I shall be next to thee. And that, Saul my father also knows.
And those two made a covenant before Jehovah. And David abode in the forest,  Jonathan went to his house.
Then the Ziphites came up to Saul to Gibeah, saying, Does not David hide himself with us in the strongholds in the forest, in the hill of Hachilah, which is on the south of the desert?
Now therefore, O king, come down, according to all the desire of thy soul to come down,  our part shall be to deliver him up into the king's hand.
And Saul said, Blessed be ye of Jehovah, for ye have had compassion on me.
Go, I pray you, make yet more sure,  know and see his place where his haunt is,  who has seen him there, for it is told me that he deals very shrewdly.
See therefore,  take knowledge of all the lurking-places where he hides himself,  come ye again to me of a certainty. And I will go with you,  it shall come to pass, if he is in the land, that I will search him out among all the thousands of Judah.
And they arose,  went to Ziph before Saul,  David and his men were in the wilderness of Maon, in the Arabah on the south of the desert.
And Saul and his men went to seek him. And they told David. Therefore he came down to the rock,  abode in the wilderness of Maon. And when Saul heard that, he pursued after David in the wilderness of Maon.
And Saul went on this side of the mountain,  David and his men on that side of the mountain. And David made haste to get away for fear of Saul. For Saul and his men encompassed David and his men round about to take them.
But there came a messenger to Saul, saying, Hasten thee,  come, for the Philistines have made a raid upon the land.
So Saul returned from pursuing after David,  went against the Philistines. Therefore they called that place Sela-hammahlekoth.
And David went up from there,  dwelt in the strongholds of En-gedi.
And it came to pass, when Saul was returned from following the Philistines, that it was told him, saying, Behold, David is in the wilderness of En-gedi.
Then Saul took three thousand chosen men out of all Israel,  went to seek David and his men upon the rocks of the wild goats.
And he came to the sheepcotes by the way, where was a cave,  Saul went in to cover his feet. Now David and his men were abiding in the innermost parts of the cave.
And the men of David said to him, Behold, the day of which Jehovah said to thee, Behold, I will deliver thine enemy into thy hand,  thou shall do to him as it shall seem good to thee. Then David arose,  cut off the skirt of Saul's robe secretly.
And it came to pass afterward, that David's heart smote him, because he had cut off Saul's skirt.
And he said to his men, Jehovah forbid that I should do this thing to my lord, Jehovah's anointed, to put forth my hand against him, since he is Jehovah's anointed.
So David restrained his men with these words,  did not allow them to rise against Saul. And Saul rose up out of the cave,  went on his way.
David also arose afterward,  went out of the cave,  cried after Saul, saying, My lord the king. And when Saul looked behind him, David bowed with his face to the earth,  did obeisance.
And David said to Saul, Why do thou hearken to men's words, saying, Behold, David seeks thy hurt?
Behold, this day thine eyes have seen how that Jehovah had delivered thee today into my hand in the cave. And some bade me kill thee,  I spared thee. And I said, I will not put forth my hand against my lord, for he is Jehovah's anointed.
Moreover, my father, see, yea, see the skirt of thy robe in my hand, for in that I cut off the skirt of thy robe,  killed thee not. Know thou and see that there is neither evil nor transgression in my hand,  I have not sinned against thee, though thou hunt after my life to take it.
Jehovah judge between me and thee,  Jehovah avenge me of thee,  my hand shall not be upon thee.
As says the proverb of the ancients, Out of the wicked comes forth wickedness,  my hand shall not be upon thee.
After whom is the king of Israel come out? After whom do thou pursue? After a dead dog, after a flea.
Jehovah therefore be judge,  give sentence between me and thee,  see,  plead my cause,  deliver me out of thy hand.
And it came to pass, when David had made an end of speaking these words to Saul, that Saul said, Is this thy voice, my son David? And Saul lifted up his voice,  wept.
And he said to David, Thou are more righteous than I, for thou have rendered to me good, whereas I have rendered to thee evil.
And thou have declared this day how that thou have dealt well with me, inasmuch as when Jehovah had delivered me up into thy hand, thou killed me not.
For if a man finds his enemy, will he let him go away well? Therefore Jehovah reward thee good for that which thou have done to me this day.
And now, behold, I know that thou shall surely be king,  that the kingdom of Israel shall be established in thy hand.
Swear now therefore to me by Jehovah, that thou will not cut off my seed after me,  that thou will not destroy my name out of my father's house.
And David swore to Saul. And Saul went home,  David and his men got up to the stronghold.
And Samuel died. And all Israel gathered themselves together,  lamented him,  buried him in his house at Ramah. And David arose,  went down to the wilderness of Paran.
And there was a man in Maon whose possessions were in Carmel. And the man was very great in goods,  he had three thousand sheep,  a thousand goats. And he was shearing his sheep in Carmel.
Now the name of the man was Nabal,  the name of his wife Abigail. And the woman was of good understanding,  of a beautiful countenance,  the man was churlish and evil in his doings,  he was of the house of Caleb.
And David heard in the wilderness that Nabal was shearing his sheep.
And David sent ten young men,  David said to the young men, Get you up to Carmel,  go to Nabal,  greet him in my name.
And thus ye shall say to him who lives in prosperity, Peace be to thee,  peace be to thy house,  peace be to all that thou have.
And now I have heard that thou have shearers. Thy shepherds have now been with us,  we did them no hurt, neither was there anything missing to them all the while they were in Carmel.
Ask thy young men,  they will tell thee. Therefore let the young men find favor in thine eyes, for we come in a good day. Give, I pray thee, whatever comes to thy hand to thy servants,  to thy son David.
And when David's young men came, they spoke to Nabal according to all those words in the name of David,  ceased.
And Nabal answered David's servants,  said, Who is David? And who is the son of Jesse? There are many servants now-a-days who break away every man from his master.
Shall I then take my bread,  my water,  my flesh that I have killed for my shearers,  give it to men of whom I know not from where they are?
So David's young men turned on their way,  went back,  came and told him according to all these words.
And David said to his men, Gird ye on every man his sword. And they girded on every man his sword,  David also girded on his sword. And there went up after David about four hundred men,  two hundred abode by the baggage.
But one of the young men told Abigail, Nabal's wife, saying, Behold, David sent messengers out of the wilderness to salute our master,  he railed at them.
But the men were very good to us,  we were not hurt, neither did we miss anything as long as we went with them when we were in the fields.
They were a wall to us both by night and by day all the while we were with them keeping the sheep.
Now therefore know and consider what thou will do, for evil is determined against our master,  against all his house. For he is such a worthless fellow that a man cannot speak to him.
Then Abigail made haste,  took two hundred loaves,  two bottles of wine,  five sheep ready dressed,  five measures of parched grain,  a hundred clusters of raisins,  two hundred cakes of figs,  laid them on donkeys.
And she said to her young men, Go on before me, behold, I come after you. But she did not tell her husband Nabal.
And it was so, as she rode on her donkey,  came down by the covert of the mountain, that, behold, David and his men came down toward her,  she met them.
Now David had said, Surely in vain have I kept all that this fellow has in the wilderness so that nothing was missed of all that pertained to him,  he has returned me evil for good.
God do so to the enemies of David,  more also, if I leave of all that pertains to him by the morning light so much as one man-child.
And when Abigail saw David, she hastened,  alighted from her donkey,  fell before David on her face,  bowed herself to the ground.
And she fell at his feet,  said, Upon me, my lord, upon me be the iniquity,  let thy handmaid, I pray thee, speak in thine ears,  hear thou the words of thy handmaid.
Let not my lord, I pray thee, regard this worthless fellow, even Nabal, for as his name is, so is he. Nabal is his name,  folly is with him. But I thy handmaid saw not the young men of my lord whom thou sent.
Now therefore, my lord, as Jehovah lives,  as thy soul lives, since Jehovah has withheld thee from blood guiltiness,  from avenging thyself with thine own hand, now therefore let thine enemies,  those who seek evil to my lord, be as Nabal.
And now this present which thy servant has brought to my lord, let it be given to the young men who follow my lord.
Forgive, I pray thee, the trespass of thy handmaid. For Jehovah will certainly make my lord a sure house, because my lord fights the battles of Jehovah,  evil shall not be found in thee all thy days.
And though men be risen up to pursue thee,  to seek thy soul, yet the soul of my lord shall be bound in the bundle of life with Jehovah thy God. And the souls of thine enemies, them he shall sling out as from the hollow of a sling.
And it shall come to pass, when Jehovah shall have done to my lord according to all the good that he has spoken concerning thee,  shall have appointed thee prince over Israel,
that this shall be no grief to thee, nor offense of heart to my lord, either that thou have shed blood without cause, or that my lord has avenged himself. And when Jehovah shall have dealt well with my lord, then remember thy handmaid.
And David said to Abigail, Blessed be Jehovah, the God of Israel, who sent thee this day to meet me,
and blessed be thy discretion,  blessed be thou, who have kept me this day from blood guiltiness,  from avenging myself with my own hand.
For in very deed, as Jehovah, the God of Israel, lives, who has withheld me from hurting thee, unless thou had hastened and come to meet me, surely there had not been left to Nabal by the morning light so much as one man-child.
So David received from her hand that which she had brought him. And he said to her, Go up in peace to thy house. See, I have hearkened to thy voice,  have accepted thy person.
And Abigail came to Nabal, , behold, he held a feast in his house like the feast of a king. And Nabal's heart was merry within him, for he was very drunk. Therefore she told him nothing, less or more, until the morning light.
And it came to pass in the morning, when the wine was gone out of Nabal, that his wife told him these things,  his heart died within him,  he became as a stone.
And it came to pass about ten days after, that Jehovah smote Nabal, so that he died.
And when David heard that Nabal was dead, he said, Blessed be Jehovah, who has pleaded the cause of my reproach from the hand of Nabal,  has kept back his servant from evil,  the evil-doing of Nabal Jehovah has returned upon his own head. And David sent and spoke concerning Abigail, to take her to him to wife.
And when the servants of David came to Abigail to Carmel, they spoke to her, saying, David has sent us to thee, to take thee to him to wife.
And she arose,  bowed herself with her face to the earth,  said, Behold, thy handmaid is a servant to wash the feet of the servants of my lord.
And Abigail hastened,  arose,  rode upon a donkey, with five of her damsels who followed her. And she went after the messengers of David,  became his wife.
David also took Ahinoam of Jezreel,  they became his wives, both of them.
Now Saul had given Michal his daughter, David's wife, to Palti the son of Laish, who was of Gallim.
And the Ziphites came to Saul to Gibeah, saying, Does not David hide himself in the hill of Hachilah, which is before the desert?
Then Saul arose,  went down to the wilderness of Ziph, having three thousand chosen men of Israel with him, to seek David in the wilderness of Ziph.
And Saul encamped in the hill of Hachilah, which is before the desert by the way. But David abode in the wilderness,  he saw that Saul came after him into the wilderness.
David therefore sent out spies,  understood that Saul definitely came.
And David arose,  came to the place where Saul had encamped. And David beheld the place where Saul lay,  Abner the son of Ner, the captain of his army. And Saul lay within the place of the wagons,  the people were encamped around about him.
Then David answered and said to Ahimelech the Hittite,  to Abishai the son of Zeruiah, brother to Joab, saying, Who will go down with me to Saul to the camp? And Abishai said, I will go down with thee.
So David and Abishai came to the people by night. And, behold, Saul lay sleeping within the place of the wagons with his spear stuck in the ground at his head,  Abner and the people lay round about him.
Then said Abishai to David, God has delivered up thine enemy into thy hand this day. Now therefore let me smite him, I pray thee, with the spear to the earth at one stroke,  I will not smite him the second time.
And David said to Abishai, Destroy him not, for who can put forth his hand against Jehovah's anointed,  be guiltless?
And David said, As Jehovah lives, Jehovah will smite him, or his day shall come to die, or he shall go down into battle and perish.
Jehovah forbid that I should put forth my hand against Jehovah's anointed. But now take, I pray thee, the spear that is at his head,  the cruse of water,  let us go.
So David took the spear and the cruse of water from Saul's head,  they got away. And no man saw it, nor knew it, neither did any awake, for they were all asleep, because a deep sleep from Jehovah was fallen upon them.
Then David went over to the other side,  stood on the top of the mountain afar off, a great space being between them.
And David cried out to the people,  to Abner the son of Ner, saying, Answer thou not, Abner? Then Abner answered and said, Who are thou that cries to the king?
And David said to Abner, Are not thou a valiant man? And who is like to thee in Israel? Why then have thou not kept watch over thy lord the king? For there came one of the people in to destroy the king thy lord.
This thing is not good that thou have done. As Jehovah lives, ye are worthy to die because ye have not kept watch over your lord, Jehovah's anointed. And now see where the king's spear is,  the cruse of water that was at his head.
And Saul knew David's voice,  said, Is this thy voice, my son David? And David said, It is my voice, my lord, O king.
And he said, Why does my lord pursue after his servant? For what have I done? Or what evil is in my hand?
Now therefore, I pray thee, let my lord the king hear the words of his servant. If it be Jehovah who has stirred thee up against me, let him accept an offering,  if it be the sons of men, cursed be they before Jehovah. For they have driven me out this day that I should not cling to the inheritance of Jehovah, saying, Go, serve other gods.
Now therefore, let not my blood fall to the earth away from the presence of Jehovah. For the king of Israel has come out to seek a flea, as when a man hunts a partridge in the mountains.
Then Saul said, I have sinned. Return, my son David, for I will no more do thee harm because my life was precious in thine eyes this day. Behold, I have played the fool,  have erred exceedingly.
And David answered and said, Behold the spear, O king! Let then one of the young men come over and fetch it.
And Jehovah will render to every man his righteousness and his faithfulness, inasmuch as Jehovah delivered thee into my hand today,  I would not put forth my hand against Jehovah's anointed.
And, behold, as thy life was much set by this day in my eyes, so let my life be much set by in the eyes of Jehovah,  let him deliver me out of all tribulation.
Then Saul said to David, Blessed be thou, my son David. Thou shall both do mightily,  shall surely prevail. So David went his way,  Saul returned to his place.
And David said in his heart, I shall now perish one day by the hand of Saul. There is nothing better for me than that I should escape into the land of the Philistines,  Saul will despair of me, to seek me any more in all the borders of Israel, so I shall escape out of his hand.
And David arose,  passed over, he and the six hundred men who were with him, to Achish the son of Maoch, king of Gath.
And David dwelt with Achish at Gath, he and his men, every man with his household, even David with his two wives, Ahinoam the Jezreelitess,  Abigail the Carmelitess, Nabal's wife.
And it was told Saul that David was fled to Gath,  he sought no more again for him.
And David said to Achish, If now I have found favor in thine eyes, let them give me a place in one of the cities in the country that I may dwell there, for why should thy servant dwell in the royal city with thee?
Then Achish gave him Ziklag that day. Therefore Ziklag pertains to the kings of Judah to this day.
And the number of the days that David dwelt in the country of the Philistines was a full year and four months.
And David and his men went up,  made a raid upon the Geshurites,  the Girzites,  the Amalekites, for those nations were the inhabitants of the land, who were of old as thou go to Shur, even to the land of Egypt.
And David smote the land,  saved neither man nor woman alive,  took away the sheep,  the oxen,  the donkeys,  the camels,  the apparel,  he returned,  came to Achish.
And Achish said, Against whom have ye made a raid today? And David said, Against the South of Judah,  against the South of the Jerahmeelites,  against the South of the Kenites.
And David saved neither man nor woman alive to bring them to Gath, saying, Lest they should tell of us, saying, So did David,  so has been his manner all the while he has dwelt in the country of the Philistines.
And Achish believed David, saying, He has made his people Israel utterly to abhor him. Therefore he shall be my servant forever.
And it came to pass in those days, that the Philistines gathered their armies together for warfare to fight with Israel. And Achish said to David, Know thou assuredly, that thou shall go out with me in the army, thou and thy men.
And David said to Achish, Therefore thou shall know what thy servant will do. And Achish said to David, Therefore I will make thee my chief bodyguard forever.
Now Samuel was dead,  all Israel had lamented him,  buried him in Ramah, even in his own city. And Saul had put away those who had familiar spirits,  the wizards, out of the land.
And the Philistines gathered themselves together,  came and encamped in Shunem. And Saul gathered all Israel together,  they encamped in Gilboa.
And when Saul saw the army of the Philistines, he was afraid,  his heart trembled greatly.
And when Saul inquired of Jehovah, Jehovah answered him not, neither by dreams, nor by Urim, nor by prophets.
Then Saul said to his servants, Seek me a woman who has a familiar spirit, that I may go to her,  inquire of her. And his servants said to him, Behold, there is a woman who has a familiar spirit at En-dor.
And Saul disguised himself,  put on other raiment,  went, he and two men with him. And they came to the woman by night,  he said, Divine to me, I pray thee, by the familiar spirit,  bring me up whomever I shall name to thee.
And the woman said to him, Behold, thou know what Saul has done, how he has cut off those who have familiar spirits,  the wizards, out of the land. Why then do thou lay a snare for my life, to cause me to die?
And Saul swore to her by Jehovah, saying, As Jehovah lives, there shall no punishment happen to thee for this thing.
Then said the woman, Whom shall I bring up to thee? And he said, Bring me up Samuel.
And when the woman saw Samuel, she cried with a loud voice. And the woman spoke to Saul, saying, Why have thou deceived me? For thou are Saul.
And the king said to her, Be not afraid, for what do thou see? And the woman said to Saul, I see a god coming up out of the earth.
And he said to her, What form is he of? And she said, An old man comes up,  he is covered with a robe. And Saul perceived that it was Samuel,  he bowed with his face to the ground,  did obeisance.
And Samuel said to Saul, Why have thou disquieted me, to bring me up? And Saul answered, I am greatly distressed, for the Philistines make war against me,  God is departed from me,  answers me no more, neither by prophets, nor by dreams. Therefore I have called thee, that thou may make known to me what I shall do.
And Samuel said, Why then do thou ask of me, since Jehovah departed from thee,  has become thine adversary?
And Jehovah has done to thee, as he spoke by me. And Jehovah has torn the kingdom out of thy hand,  given it to thy neighbor, even to David.
Because thou obeyed not the voice of Jehovah,  did not execute his fierce wrath upon Amalek, therefore Jehovah has done this thing to thee this day.
Moreover Jehovah will deliver Israel also with thee into the hand of the Philistines,  tomorrow thou and thy sons shall be with me. Jehovah will also deliver the army of Israel into the hand of the Philistines.
Then Saul fell straightaway his full length upon the earth,  was greatly afraid because of the words of Samuel,  there was no strength in him, for he had eaten no bread all the day, nor all the night.
And the woman came to Saul,  saw that he was greatly troubled,  said to him, Behold, thy handmaid has hearkened to thy voice,  I have put my life in my hand,  have hearkened to thy words which thou spoke to me.
Now therefore, I pray thee, hearken thou also to the voice of thy handmaid,  let me set a morsel of bread before thee,  eat, that thou may have strength when thou go on thy way.
But he refused,  said, I will not eat. But his servants, together with the woman, constrained him,  he hearkened to their voice. So he arose from the ground,  sat upon the bed.
And the woman had a fatted calf in the house. And she hastened,  killed it,  she took flour,  kneaded it,  baked unleavened bread of it.
And she brought it before Saul,  before his servants,  they ate. Then they rose up,  went away that night.
Now the Philistines gathered together all their armies to Aphek,  the Israelites encamped by the fountain which is in Jezreel.
And the lords of the Philistines passed on by hundreds,  by thousands,  David and his men passed on in the rearward with Achish.
Then the rulers of the Philistines said, What are these Hebrews? And Achish said to the rulers of the Philistines, Is not this David, the servant of Saul the king of Israel, who has been with me these days, or rather these years,  I have found no fault in him since he fell away to me to this day?
But the rulers of the Philistines were angry with him. And the rulers of the Philistines said to him, Make the man return, that he may go back to his place where thou have appointed him,  let him not go down with us to battle, lest in the battle he become an adversary to us. For with what does this man reconcile himself to his lord? Would it not be with the heads of these men?
Is not this David, of whom they sang one to another in dances, saying, Saul has slain his thousands, And David his ten thousands?
Then Achish called David,  said to him, As Jehovah lives, thou have been upright,  thy going out and thy coming in with me in the army is good in my sight, for I have not found evil in thee since the day of thy coming to me to this day. Nevertheless the lords do not favor thee.
Therefore now return,  go in peace, that thou not displease the lords of the Philistines.
And David said to Achish, But what have I done? And what have thou found in thy servant so long as I have been before thee to this day, that I may not go and fight against the enemies of my lord the king?
And Achish answered and said to David, I know that thou are good in my sight, as an agent of God, notwithstanding the rulers of the Philistines have said, He shall not go up with us to the battle.
Therefore now rise up early in the morning with the servants of thy lord who have come with thee,  as soon as ye are up early in the morning,  have light, depart.
So David rose up early, he and his men, to depart in the morning, to return into the land of the Philistines. And the Philistines went up to Jezreel.
And it came to pass, when David and his men came to Ziklag on the third day, that the Amalekites had made a raid upon the South,  upon Ziklag,  had smitten Ziklag,  burned it with fire,
and had taken captive the women and all that were in it, both small and great. They did not kill any,  carried them off,  went their way.
And when David and his men came to the city, behold, it was burned with fire. And their wives,  their sons,  their daughters, were taken captive.
Then David and the people who were with him lifted up their voice and wept, until they had no more power to weep.
And David's two wives were taken captive, Ahinoam the Jezreelitess,  Abigail the wife of Nabal the Carmelite.
And David was greatly distressed, for the people spoke of stoning him, because the soul of all the people was grieved, every man for his sons and for his daughters. But David strengthened himself in Jehovah his God.
And David said to Abiathar the priest, the son of Ahimelech, I pray thee, bring me here the ephod. And Abiathar brought there the ephod to David.
And David inquired of Jehovah, saying, If I pursue after this troop, shall I overtake them? And he answered him, Pursue, for thou shall surely overtake them,  shall without fail recover all.
So David went, he and the six hundred men who were with him,  came to the brook Besor, where those who were left behind stayed.
But David pursued, he and four hundred men, for two hundred stayed behind, who were so faint that they could not go over the brook Besor.
And they found an Egyptian in the field,  brought him to David,  gave him bread. And he ate,  they gave him water to drink.
And they gave him a piece of a cake of figs,  two clusters of raisins. And when he had eaten, his spirit came again to him, for he had eaten no bread, nor drunk any water, three days and three nights.
And David said to him, To whom do thou belong? And from where are thou? And he said, I am a young man of Egypt, servant to an Amalekite. And my master left me because three days ago I fell sick.
We made a raid upon the South of the Cherethites,  upon that which belongs to Judah,  upon the South of Caleb,  we burned Ziklag with fire.
And David said to him, Will thou bring me down to this troop? And he said, Swear to me by God, that thou will neither kill me, nor deliver me up into the hands of my master,  I will bring thee down to this troop.
And when he had brought him down, behold, they were spread abroad over all the ground, eating and drinking,  dancing, because of all the great spoil that they had taken out of the land of the Philistines,  out of the land of Judah.
And David smote them from the twilight even to the evening of the next day. And there escaped not a man of them, except four hundred young men who rode upon camels and fled.
And David recovered all that the Amalekites had taken,  David rescued his two wives.
And there was nothing lacking to them, neither small nor great, neither sons nor daughters, neither spoil, nor anything that they had taken to them; David brought back all.
And David took all the flocks and the herds, which they drove before those other cattle,  said, This is David's spoil.
And David came to the two hundred men, who were so faint that they could not follow David, whom also they had made to abide at the brook Besor. And they went forth to meet David,  to meet the people who were with him. And when David came near to the people, he saluted them.
Then answered all the wicked men and base fellows of those who went with David,  said, Because they went not with us, we will not give them anything of the spoil that we have recovered except to every man his wife and his children that he may lead them away,  depart.
Then David said, Ye shall not do so, my brothers, with that which Jehovah has given to us, who has preserved us,  delivered the troop that came against us into our hand.
And who will hearken to you in this matter? For as his share is who goes down to the battle so shall his share be who remains by the baggage; they shall share alike.
And it was so from that day forward, that he made it a statute and an ordinance for Israel to this day.
And when David came to Ziklag, he sent from the spoil to the elders of Judah, even to his friends, saying, Behold, a present for you from the spoil of the enemies of Jehovah:
to those who were in Bethel,  to those who were in Ramoth of the South,  to those who were in Jattir,
and to those who were in Aroer,  to those who were in Siphmoth,  to those who were in Eshtemoa,
and to those who were in Racal,  to those who were in the cities of the Jerahmeelites,  to those who were in the cities of the Kenites,
and to those who were in Hormah,  to those who were in Borashan,  to those who were in Athach,
and to those who were in Hebron,  to all the places where David himself and his men were accustomed to frequent.
Now the Philistines fought against Israel. And the men of Israel fled from before the Philistines,  fell down slain in mount Gilboa.
And the Philistines followed hard upon Saul and upon his sons,  the Philistines killed Jonathan,  Abinadab,  Malchishua, the sons of Saul.
And the battle went severely against Saul,  the archers overtook him,  he was greatly distressed because of the archers.
Then Saul said to his armor bearer, Draw thy sword,  thrust me through with it, lest these uncircumcised come and thrust me through,  abuse me. But his armor bearer would not, for he was very afraid. Therefore Saul took his sword,  fell upon it.
And when his armor bearer saw that Saul was dead, he likewise fell upon his sword,  died with him.
So Saul died,  his three sons,  his armor bearer,  all his men, that same day together.
And when the men of Israel who were on the other side of the valley,  those who were beyond the Jordan, saw that the men of Israel fled,  that Saul and his sons were dead, they forsook the cities,  fled. And the Philistines came and dwelt in them.
And it came to pass on the morrow, when the Philistines came to strip the slain, that they found Saul and his three sons fallen in mount Gilboa.
And they cut off his head,  stripped off his armor,  sent into the land of the Philistines round about to carry the news to the house of their idols,  to the people.
And they put his armor in the house of the Ashtaroth,  they fastened his body to the wall of Beth-shan.
And when the inhabitants of Jabesh-gilead heard concerning him, that which the Philistines had done to Saul,
all the valiant men arose,  went all night,  took the body of Saul and the bodies of his sons from the wall of Beth-shan,  they came to Jabesh,  burnt them there.
And they took their bones,  buried them under the tamarisk tree in Jabesh,  fasted seven days.
II Samuel
And it came to pass after the death of Saul, when David was returned from the slaughter of the Amalekites,  David had abode two days in Ziklag,
it came to pass on the third day, that, behold, a man came out of the camp from Saul with his clothes torn,  earth upon his head. And so it was, when he came to David, that he fell to the ground,  did obeisance.
And David said to him, From where did thou come? And he said to him, I escaped out of the camp of Israel.
And David said to him, How did the matter go? I pray thee, tell me. And he answered, The people are fled from the battle,  many of the people also are fallen and dead,  Saul and Jonathan his son are also dead.
And David said to the young man who told him, How do thou know that Saul and Jonathan his son are dead?
And the young man who told him said, As I happened by chance upon mount Gilboa, behold, Saul was leaning upon his spear, , lo, the chariots and the horsemen followed close after him.
And when he looked behind him, he saw me,  called to me. And I answered, Here I am.
And he said to me, Who are thou? And I answered him, I am an Amalekite.
And he said to me, Stand, I pray thee, beside me,  kill me, for anguish has taken hold of me, because my life is yet whole in me.
So I stood beside him and killed him, because I was sure that he could not live after he was fallen. And I took the crown that was upon his head,  the bracelet that was on his arm,  have brought them here to my lord.
Then David took hold on his clothes,  tore them,  likewise all the men who were with him.
And they mourned,  wept,  fasted until evening, for Saul,  for Jonathan his son,  for the people of Jehovah,  for the house of Israel, because they were fallen by the sword.
And David said to the young man who told him, From where are thou? And he answered, I am the son of a sojourner, an Amalekite.
And David said to him, Why were thou not afraid to put forth thy hand to destroy Jehovah's anointed?
And David called one of the young men,  said, Go near,  fall upon him. And he smote him so that he died.
And David said to him, Thy blood be upon thy head, for thy mouth has testified against thee, saying, I have slain Jehovah's anointed.
And David lamented with this lamentation over Saul and over Jonathan his son
(and he bade them teach the sons of Judah the song of the bow; behold, it is written in the book of Jashar):
Thy glory, O Israel, is slain upon thy high places! How are the mighty fallen!
Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of Ashkelon, lest the daughters of the Philistines rejoice, lest the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph.
Ye mountains of Gilboa, let there be no dew nor rain upon you, neither fields of offerings, for there the shield of the mighty was vilely cast away, the shield of Saul, not anointed with oil.
From the blood of the slain, from the fat of the mighty, the bow of Jonathan turned not back,  the sword of Saul returned not empty.
Saul and Jonathan, men who were loved and pleasant, undivided; comely in their lives,  undivided in their death; swifter than eagles, they were stronger than lions.
Ye daughters of Israel, weep over Saul, who clothed you delicately in scarlet, who put ornaments of gold upon your apparel.
How are the mighty fallen in the midst of the battle! Jonathan is slain upon thy high places.
I am distressed for thee, my brother Jonathan. Very pleasant thou have been to me. Thy love to me was wonderful, exceeding the love of women.
How are the mighty fallen,  the weapons of war perished!
And it came to pass after this, that David inquired of Jehovah, saying, Shall I go up into any of the cities of Judah? And Jehovah said to him, Go up. And David said, Where shall I go up? And he said, To Hebron.
So David went up there,  his two wives also, Ahinoam the Jezreelitess,  Abigail the wife of Nabal the Carmelite.
And David brought up his men who were with him, every man with his household,  they dwelt in the cities of Hebron.
And the men of Judah came,  there they anointed David king over the house of Judah. And they told David, saying, The men of Jabesh-gilead were those who buried Saul.
And David sent messengers to the men of Jabesh-gilead,  said to them, Blessed be ye of Jehovah, that ye have shown this kindness to your lord, even to Saul,  have buried him.
And now Jehovah show loving kindness and truth to you. And I also will reward you this kindness because ye have done this thing.
Now therefore let your hands be strong,  be ye valiant, for Saul your lord is dead,  also the house of Judah have anointed me king over them.
Now Abner the son of Ner, captain of Saul's army, had taken Ish-bosheth the son of Saul,  brought him over to Mahanaim.
And he made him king over Gilead,  over the Ashurites,  over Jezreel,  over Ephraim,  over Benjamin,  over all Israel.
Ish-bosheth, Saul's son, was forty years old when he began to reign over Israel,  he reigned two years. But the house of Judah followed David.
And the time that David was king in Hebron over the house of Judah was seven years and six months.
And Abner the son of Ner,  the servants of Ish-bosheth the son of Saul, went out from Mahanaim to Gibeon.
And Joab the son of Zeruiah,  the servants of David, went out,  met them by the pool of Gibeon. And they sat down, the one on the one side of the pool,  the other on the other side of the pool.
And Abner said to Joab, Let the young men, I pray thee, arise and play before us. And Joab said, Let them arise.
Then they arose and went over by number: twelve for Benjamin,  for Ish-bosheth the son of Saul,  twelve of the servants of David.
And each man caught his fellow by the head,  thrust his sword in his fellow's side, so they fell down together. Therefore that place was called Helkath-hazzurim, which is in Gibeon.
And the battle was very severe that day. And Abner was beaten,  the men of Israel, before the servants of David.
And the three sons of Zeruiah were there, Joab,  Abishai,  Asahel. And Asahel was as light of foot as a wild roe.
And Asahel pursued after Abner,  in going he turned not to the right hand nor to the left from following Abner.
Then Abner looked behind him,  said, Is it thou, Asahel? And he answered, It is I.
And Abner said to him, Turn thee aside to thy right hand or to thy left,  lay hold on one of the young men,  take his armor. But Asahel would not turn aside from following him.
And Abner said again to Asahel, Turn thee aside from following me. Why should I smite thee to the ground? How then would I hold up my face to Joab thy brother?
However he refused to turn aside. Therefore Abner with the hinder end of the spear smote him in the body, so that the spear came out behind him. And he fell down there,  died in the same place. And it came to pass, that as many as came to the place where Asahel fell down and died stood still.
But Joab and Abishai pursued after Abner. And the sun went down when they came to the hill of Ammah that lies before Giah by the way of the wilderness of Gibeon.
And the sons of Benjamin gathered themselves together after Abner,  became one band,  stood on the top of a hill.
Then Abner called to Joab,  said, Shall the sword devour for ever? Know thou not that it will be bitterness in the latter end? How long shall it be then, before thou bid the people return from following their brothers?
And Joab said, As God lives unless thou had spoken, surely then in the morning the people would have gone up every man from following his brother.
So Joab blew the trumpet. And all the people stood still,  pursued after Israel no more, neither did they fight any more.
And Abner and his men went all that night through the Arabah,  they passed over the Jordan,  went through all Bithron,  came to Mahanaim.
And Joab returned from following Abner. And when he had gathered all the people together, there lacked of David's servants nineteen men and Asahel.
But the servants of David had smitten of Benjamin,  of Abner's men, so that three hundred and sixty men died.
And they took up Asahel,  buried him in the sepulcher of his father, which was in Bethlehem. And Joab and his men went all night,  the day broke upon them at Hebron.
Now there was long war between the house of Saul and the house of David. And David grew stronger and stronger,  the house of Saul grew weaker and weaker.
And sons were born to David in Hebron: and his firstborn was Amnon, of Ahinoam the Jezreelitess,
and his second, Chileab, of Abigail the wife of Nabal the Carmelite,  the third, Absalom the son of Maacah the daughter of Talmai king of Geshur,
and the fourth, Adonijah the son of Haggith,  the fifth, Shephatiah the son of Abital,
and the sixth, Ithream, of Eglah, David's wife. These were born to David in Hebron.
And it came to pass, while there was war between the house of Saul and the house of David, that Abner made himself strong in the house of Saul.
Now Saul had a concubine whose name was Rizpah, the daughter of Aiah. And Ish-bosheth said to Abner, Why have thou gone in to my father's concubine?
Then Abner was very angry for the words of Ish-bosheth,  said, Am I a dog's head that belongs to Judah? This day I show kindness to the house of Saul thy father, to his brothers,  to his friends,  have not delivered thee into the hand of David,  yet thou charge me this day with a fault concerning this woman.
God do so to Abner,  more also, if, as Jehovah has sworn to David, I do not even so to him,
to transfer the kingdom from the house of Saul,  to set up the throne of David over Israel and over Judah, from Dan even to Beersheba.
And he could not answer Abner another word because he feared him.
And Abner sent messengers to David on his behalf, saying, Whose is the land? And saying, Make thy league with me, , behold, my hand shall be with thee to bring about all Israel to thee.
And he said, Well! I will make a league with thee,  one thing I require of thee. That is, thou shall not see my face unless thou first bring Michal, Saul's daughter, when thou come to see my face.
And David sent messengers to Ish-bosheth, Saul's son, saying, Deliver to me my wife Michal whom I betrothed to me for a hundred foreskins of the Philistines.
And Ish-bosheth sent,  took her from her husband, even from Paltiel the son of Laish.
And her husband went with her, weeping as he went,  followed her to Bahurim. Then Abner said to him, Go, return,  he returned.
And Abner had communication with the elders of Israel, saying, In times past ye sought for David to be king over you.
Now then do it, for Jehovah has spoken of David, saying, By the hand of my servant David I will save my people Israel out of the hand of the Philistines,  out of the hand of all their enemies.
And Abner also spoke in the ears of Benjamin. And Abner also went to speak in the ears of David in Hebron all that seemed good to Israel,  to the whole house of Benjamin.
So Abner came to David to Hebron,  twenty men with him. And David made Abner and the men who were with him a feast.
And Abner said to David, I will arise and go,  will gather all Israel to my lord the king that they may make a covenant with thee,  that thou may reign over all that thy soul desires. And David sent Abner away,  he went in peace.
And, behold, the servants of David and Joab came from a foray,  brought in a great spoil with them,  Abner was not with David in Hebron, for he had sent him away,  he was gone in peace.
When Joab and all the army that was with him came, they told Joab, saying, Abner the son of Ner came to the king,  he has sent him away,  he has gone in peace.
Then Joab came to the king,  said, What have thou done? Behold, Abner came to thee. Why is it that thou have sent him away,  he is quite gone?
Thou know Abner the son of Ner, that he came to deceive thee,  to know thy going out and thy coming in,  to know all that thou do.
And when Joab came out from David, he sent messengers after Abner,  they brought him back from the well of Sirah,  David knew it not.
And when Abner was returned to Hebron, Joab took him aside into the midst of the gate to speak with him quietly,  smote him there in the body, so that he died, for the blood of Asahel his brother.
And afterward, when David heard it, he said, I and my kingdom are guiltless before Jehovah forever of the blood of Abner the son of Ner.
Let it fall upon the head of Joab,  upon all his father's house. And let there not fail from the house of Joab one who has an issue, or who is a leper, or who leans on a staff, or who falls by the sword, or who lacks bread.
So Joab and Abishai his brother killed Abner because he had killed their brother Asahel at Gibeon in the battle.
And David said to Joab,  to all the people who were with him, Rend your clothes,  gird you with sackcloth,  mourn before Abner. And king David followed the bier.
And they buried Abner in Hebron. And the king lifted up his voice,  wept at the grave of Abner,  all the people wept.
And the king lamented for Abner,  said, Should Abner die as a fool dies?
Thy hands were not bound, nor thy feet put into fetters. As a man falls before the sons of iniquity, so did thou fall. And all the people wept again over him.
And all the people came to cause David to eat bread while it was yet day,  David swore, saying, God do so to me,  more also, if I taste bread, or anything else, till the sun is down.
And all the people took notice of it,  it pleased them, as whatever the king did pleased all the people.
So all the people and all Israel understood that day that it was not of the king to kill Abner the son of Ner.
And the king said to his servants, Know ye not that there is a prince and a great man fallen this day in Israel?
And I am this day weak, though anointed king,  these men the sons of Zeruiah are too hard for me. Jehovah reward the evildoer according to his wickedness.
And when Saul's son, heard that Abner was dead in Hebron, his hands became feeble,  all the Israelites were troubled.
And Saul's son had two men who were captains of bands. The name of the one was Baanah,  the name of the other Rechab, the sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, of the sons of Benjamin, for Beeroth also is reckoned to Benjamin.
And the Beerothites fled to Gittaim,  have been sojourners there until this day.
Now Jonathan, Saul's son, had a son who was lame in his feet. He was five years old when the news came of Saul and Jonathan out of Jezreel,  his nurse took him up,  fled. And it came to pass, as she made haste to flee, that he fell,  became lame. And his name was Mephibosheth.
And the sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, Rechab and Baanah, went,  came about the heat of the day to the house of Ish-bosheth, as he took his rest at noon.
And they came there into the midst of the house as though they would have fetched wheat,  they smote him in the body. And Rechab and Baanah his brother escaped.
Now when they came into the house, as he lay on his bed in his bedchamber, they smote him,  killed him,  beheaded him,  took his head,  went by the way of the Arabah all night.
And they brought the head of Ish-bosheth to David to Hebron,  said to the king, Behold, the head of Ish-bosheth, the son of Saul, thine enemy, who sought thy life. And Jehovah has avenged my lord the king this day of Saul,  of his seed.
And David answered Rechab and Baanah his brother, the sons of Rimmon the Beerothite,  said to them, As Jehovah lives, who has redeemed my soul out of all adversity,
when he who told me, saying, Behold, Saul is dead, thinking to have brought good news, I took hold of him,  killed him in Ziklag, which was the reward I gave him for his news.
How much more, when evil men have slain a righteous man in his own house upon his bed, shall I not now require his blood of your hand,  take you away from the earth?
And David commanded his young men,  they killed them,  cut off their hands and their feet,  hanged them up beside the pool in Hebron. But they took the head of Ish-bosheth,  buried it in the grave of Abner in Hebron.
Then all the tribes of Israel came to David to Hebron,  spoke, saying, Behold, we are thy bone and thy flesh.
In times past, when Saul was king over us, it was thou who led out and brought in Israel. And Jehovah said to thee, Thou shall be shepherd of my people Israel,  thou shall be prince over Israel.
So all the elders of Israel came to the king to Hebron. And king David made a covenant with them in Hebron before Jehovah,  they anointed David king over Israel.
David was thirty years old when he began to reign,  he reigned forty years.
In Hebron he reigned over Judah seven years and six months,  in Jerusalem he reigned thirty-three years over all Israel and Judah.
And the king and his men went to Jerusalem against the Jebusites, the inhabitants of the land, who spoke to David, saying, Unless thou take away the blind and the lame, thou shall not come in here, thinking, David cannot come in here.
Nevertheless David took the stronghold of Zion; the same is the city of David.
And David said on that day, Whoever smites the Jebusites, let him get up to the watercourse,  smite the lame and the blind, the hated by David's soul, because the blind and the lame say, He cannot come into the house.
And David dwelt in the stronghold,  called it the city of David. And David built round about from Millo and inward.
And David grew greater and greater, for Jehovah, the God of hosts, was with him.
And Hiram king of Tyre sent messengers to David,  cedar trees,  carpenters,  masons,  they built David a house.
And David perceived that Jehovah had established him king over Israel,  that he had exalted his kingdom for his people Israel's sake.
And David took for him more concubines and wives out of Jerusalem, after he came from Hebron,  there were yet sons and daughters born to David.
And these are the names of those who were born to him in Jerusalem: Shammua,  Shobab,  Nathan,  Solomon,
and Ibhar,  Elishua,  Nepheg,  Japhia,
and Elishama,  Eliada,  Eliphelet.
And when the Philistines heard that they had anointed David king over Israel, all the Philistines went up to seek David. And David heard of it,  went down to the stronghold.
Now the Philistines had come and spread themselves in the valley of Rephaim.
And David inquired of Jehovah, saying, Shall I go up against the Philistines? Will thou deliver them into my hand? And Jehovah said to David, Go up, for I will certainly deliver the Philistines into thy hand.
And David came to Baal-perazim,  David smote them there. And he said, Jehovah has broken my enemies before me, like the breach of waters. Therefore he called the name of that place Baal-perazim.
And they left their images there,  David and his men took them away.
And the Philistines came up yet again,  spread themselves in the valley of Rephaim.
And when David inquired of Jehovah, he said, Thou shall not go up. Make a circuit behind them,  come upon them opposite the mulberry trees.
And it shall be, when thou hear the sound of marching in the tops of the mulberry trees, that then thou shall bestir thyself, for then Jehovah has gone out before thee to smite the army of the Philistines.
And David did so, as Jehovah commanded him,  smote the Philistines from Geba until thou come to Gezer.
And David again gathered together all the chosen men of Israel, thirty thousand.
And David arose,  went with all the people who were with him, from Baale-judah, to bring up from there the ark of God, which is called by the Name, even the name of Jehovah of hosts who sits above the cherubim.
And they set the ark of God upon a new cart,  brought it out of the house of Abinadab that was on the hill. And Uzzah and Ahio, the sons of Abinadab, drove the new cart.
And they brought it out of the house of Abinadab, which was on the hill, with the ark of God,  Ahio went before the ark.
And David and all the house of Israel played before Jehovah with all manner of instruments of fir-wood,  with harps,  with psalteries,  with timbrels,  with castanets,  with cymbals.
And when they came to the threshing-floor of Nacon, Uzzah put forth to the ark of God,  took hold of it, for the oxen stumbled.
And the anger of Jehovah was kindled against Uzzah,  God smote him there for his error,  he died there by the ark of God.
And David was displeased, because Jehovah had broken forth upon Uzzah. And he called that place Perez-uzzah, to this day.
And David was afraid of Jehovah that day,  he said, How shall the ark of Jehovah come to me?
So David would not remove the ark of Jehovah to him into the city of David,  David carried it aside into the house of Obed-edom the Gittite.
And the ark of Jehovah remained in the house of Obed-edom the Gittite three months,  Jehovah blessed Obed-edom,  all his house.
And it was told king David, saying, Jehovah has blessed the house of Obed-edom,  all that pertains to him, because of the ark of God. And David went and brought up the ark of God from the house of Obed-edom into the city of David with joy.
And it was so, that, when those who bore the ark of Jehovah had gone six paces, he sacrificed an ox and a fatling.
And David danced before Jehovah with all his might. And David was girded with a linen ephod.
So David and all the house of Israel brought up the ark of Jehovah with shouting,  with the sound of the trumpet.
And it was so, as the ark of Jehovah came into the city of David, that Michal the daughter of Saul looked out at the window,  saw king David leaping and dancing before Jehovah,  she despised him in her heart.
And they brought in the ark of Jehovah,  set it in its place, in the midst of the tent that David had pitched for it. And David offered burnt offerings and peace offerings before Jehovah.
And when David had made an end of offering the burnt offering and the peace offerings, he blessed the people in the name of Jehovah of hosts.
And he dealt among all the people, even among the whole multitude of Israel, both to men and women, to every one a cake of bread,  a portion of flesh,  a cake of raisins. So all the people departed every one to his house.
Then David returned to bless his household. And Michal the daughter of Saul came out to meet David,  said, How glorious was the king of Israel today, who uncovered himself today in the eyes of the handmaids of his servants as one of the vain fellows shamelessly uncovers himself!
And David said to Michal, It was before Jehovah, who chose me above thy father,  above all his house, to appoint me prince over the people of Jehovah, over Israel. Therefore I will play before Jehovah.
And I will be yet more vile than this,  will be base in my own sight,  of the handmaids of whom thou have spoken, of them I shall be had in honor.
And Michal the daughter of Saul had no child to the day of her death.
And it came to pass, when the king dwelt in his house,  Jehovah had given him rest from all his enemies round about,
that the king said to Nathan the prophet, See now, I dwell in a house of cedar,  the ark of God dwells within curtains.
And Nathan said to the king, Go, do all that is in thy heart, for Jehovah is with thee.
And it came to pass the same night, that the word of Jehovah came to Nathan, saying,
Go and tell my servant David, Thus says Jehovah, Shall thou build a house for me to dwell in?
For I have not dwelt in a house since the day that I brought up the sons of Israel out of Egypt, even to this day,  have walked in a tent and in a tabernacle.
In all places in which I have walked with all the sons of Israel, did I speak a word with any of the tribes of Israel, whom I commanded to be shepherd of my people Israel, saying, Why have ye not built for me a house of cedar?
Now therefore thus thou shall say to my servant David, Thus says Jehovah of hosts, I took thee from the sheepfold, from following the sheep, that thou should be prince over my people, over Israel.
And I have been with thee wherever thou went,  have cut off all thine enemies from before thee. And I will make thee a great name, like the name of the great ones that are on the earth.
And I will appoint a place for my people Israel,  will plant them, that they may dwell in their own place,  be moved no more. Neither shall the sons of iniquity afflict them any more, as at the first,
and as from the day that I commanded judges to be over my people Israel,  I will cause thee to rest from all thine enemies. Moreover Jehovah tells thee that Jehovah will make thee a house.
When thy days are fulfilled,  thou shall sleep with thy fathers, I will set up thy seed after thee, who shall proceed out of thy bowels,  I will establish his kingdom.
He shall build a house for my name,  I will establish the throne of his kingdom forever.
I will be his father,  he shall be my son. If he commits iniquity, I will chasten him with the rod of men,  with the stripes of the sons of men,
but my loving kindness shall not depart from him, as I took it from Saul whom I put away before thee.
And thy house and thy kingdom shall be made sure forever before thee; thy throne shall be established forever.
According to all these words,  according to all this vision, so Nathan spoke to David.
Then David the king went in,  sat before Jehovah. And he said, Who am I, O lord Jehovah,  what is my house, that thou have brought me thus far?
And this was yet a small thing in thine eyes, O lord Jehovah,  thou have spoken also of thy servant's house for a great while to come,  this too according to the manner of men, O lord Jehovah!
And what can David say more to thee? For thou know thy servant, O lord Jehovah.
For thy word's sake,  according to thine own heart, thou have wrought all this greatness, to make thy servant know it.
Therefore thou are great, O Jehovah God, for there is none like thee, neither is there any God besides thee, according to all that we have heard with our ears.
And what one nation on the earth is like thy people, even like Israel, whom God went to redeem to himself for a people,  to make him a name,  to do great things for you,  awesome things for thy land, before thy people whom thou redeemed to thee out of Egypt, from the nations and their gods?
And thou established to thyself thy people Israel to be a people to thee forever,  thou, Jehovah, became their God.
And now, O Jehovah God, the word that thou have spoken concerning thy servant,  concerning his house, confirm it forever,  do as thou have spoken.
And let thy name be magnified forever, saying, Jehovah of hosts is God over Israel,  the house of thy servant David shall be established before thee.
For thou, O Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel, have revealed to thy servant, saying, I will build thee a house. Therefore thy servant has found in his heart to pray this prayer to thee.
And now, O lord Jehovah, thou are God,  thy words are truth,  thou have promised this good thing to thy servant.
Now therefore let it please thee to bless the house of thy servant, that it may continue forever before thee, for thou, O lord Jehovah, have spoken it. And with thy blessing let the house of thy servant be blessed forever.
And after this it came to pass, that David smote the Philistines,  subdued them. And David took the bridle of the mother city out of the hand of the Philistines.
And he smote Moab,  measured them with the line, making them to lie down on the ground. And he measured two lines to put to death,  one full line to keep alive. And the Moabites became servants to David,  brought tribute.
David also smote Hadadezer the son of Rehob, king of Zobah, as he went to recover his dominion at the River.
And David took from him a thousand and seven hundred horsemen,  twenty thousand footmen. And David hocked all the chariot horses,  reserved of them for a hundred chariots.
And when the Syrians of Damascus came to aid Hadadezer king of Zobah, David smote of the Syrians twenty-two thousand men.
Then David put garrisons in Syria of Damascus,  the Syrians became servants to David,  brought tribute. And Jehovah gave victory to David wherever he went.
And David took the shields of gold that were on the servants of Hadadezer,  brought them to Jerusalem.
And from Betah and from Berothai, cities of Hadadezer, king David took exceedingly much brass.
And when Toi king of Hamath heard that David had smitten all the army of Hadadezer,
then Toi sent Joram his son to king David to salute him,  to bless him, because he had fought against Hadadezer and smitten him, for Hadadezer had wars with Toi. And Joram brought with him vessels of silver,  vessels of gold,  vessels of brass.
These also king David dedicated to Jehovah with the silver and gold that he dedicated of all the nations which he subdued:
of Syria,  of Moab,  of the sons of Ammon,  of the Philistines,  of Amalek,  of the spoil of Hadadezer, son of Rehob, king of Zobah.
And David got a name for him when he returned from smiting the Syrians in the Valley of Salt, even eighteen thousand men.
And he put garrisons in Edom. He put garrisons throughout all Edom,  all the Edomites became servants to David. And Jehovah gave victory to David wherever he went.
And David reigned over all Israel. And David executed justice and righteousness to all his people.
And Joab the son of Zeruiah was over the army,  Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud was recorder,
and Zadok the son of Ahitub,  Ahimelech the son of Abiathar, were priests,  Seraiah was scribe,
and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over the Cherethites and the Pelethites,  David's sons were chief ministers.
And David said, Is there yet any who is left of the house of Saul that I may show him kindness for Jonathan's sake?
And there was of the house of Saul a servant whose name was Ziba,  they called him to David. And the king said to him, Are thou Ziba? And he said, Thy servant is he.
And the king said, Is there not yet any of the house of Saul that I may show the kindness of God to him? And Ziba said to the king, Jonathan has yet a son who is lame in his feet.
And the king said to him, Where is he? And Ziba said to the king, Behold, he is in the house of Machir the son of Ammiel, in Lo-debar.
Then king David sent,  fetched him out of the house of Machir the son of Ammiel, from Lo-debar.
And Mephibosheth, the son of Jonathan, the son of Saul, came to David,  fell on his face,  did obeisance. And David said, Mephibosheth. And he answered, Behold, thy servant!
And David said to him, Fear not, for I will surely show thee kindness for Jonathan thy father's sake,  will restore to thee all the land of Saul thy father,  thou shall eat bread at my table continually.
And he did obeisance,  said, What is thy servant that thou should look upon such a dead dog as I am?
Then the king called to Ziba, Saul's servant,  said to him, All that pertained to Saul and to all his house I have given to thy master's son.
And thou shall till the land for him, thou,  thy sons,  thy servants. And thou shall bring in the fruits that thy master's son may have bread to eat,  Mephibosheth thy master's son shall always eat bread at my table. Now Ziba had fifteen sons and twenty servants.
Then Ziba said to the king, According to all that my lord the king commands his servant, so shall thy servant do. As for Mephibosheth, the king said, he shall eat at my table as one of the king's sons.
And Mephibosheth had a young son, whose name was Mica. And all who dwelt in the house of Ziba were servants to Mephibosheth.
So Mephibosheth dwelt in Jerusalem, for he ate continually at the king's table. And he was lame in both his feet.
And it came to pass after this, that the king of the sons of Ammon died,  Hanun his son reigned in his stead.
And David said, I will show kindness to Hanun the son of Nahash, as his father showed kindness to me. So David sent by his servants to comfort him concerning his father. And David's servants came into the land of the sons of Ammon.
But the rulers of the sons of Ammon said to Hanun their lord, Think thou that David honors thy father, in that he has sent comforters to thee? Has not David sent his servants to thee to search the city,  to spy it out,  to overthrow it?
So Hanun took David's servants,  shaved off the one half of their beards,  cut off their garments in the middle, even to their buttocks,  sent them away.
When they told it to David, he sent to meet them, for the men were greatly ashamed. And the king said, Tarry at Jericho until your beards be grown,  then return.
And when the sons of Ammon saw that they had become odious to David, the sons of Ammon sent and hired the Syrians of Beth-rehob,  the Syrians of Zobah, twenty thousand footmen,  the king of Maacah with a thousand men,  the men of Tob twelve thousand men.
And when David heard of it, he sent Joab,  all the army of the mighty men.
And the sons of Ammon came out,  put the battle in array at the entrance of the gate. And the Syrians of Zobah and of Rehob,  the men of Tob and Maacah, were by themselves in the field.
Now when Joab saw that the battle was set against him in front and behind, he chose from all the choice men of Israel,  put them in array against the Syrians.
And the rest of the people he committed into the hand of Abishai his brother. And he put them in array against the sons of Ammon.
And he said, If the Syrians be too strong for me, then thou shall help me,  if the sons of Ammon be too strong for thee, then I will come and help thee.
Be of good courage,  let us play the man for our people,  for the cities of our God. And Jehovah do that which seems good to him.
So Joab and the people who were with him drew near to the battle against the Syrians. And they fled before him.
And when the sons of Ammon saw that the Syrians had fled, they likewise fled before Abishai,  entered into the city. Then Joab returned from the sons of Ammon,  came to Jerusalem.
And when the Syrians saw that they were put to the worse before Israel, they gathered themselves together.
And Hadarezer sent,  brought out the Syrians who were beyond the River,  they came to Helam, with Shobach the captain of the army of Hadarezer at their head.
And it was told David. And he gathered all Israel together,  passed over the Jordan,  came to Helam. And the Syrians set themselves in array against David,  fought with him.
And the Syrians fled before Israel. And David killed of the Syrians the men of seven hundred chariots,  forty thousand horsemen,  smote Shobach the captain of their army so that he died there.
And when all the kings who were servants to Hadarezer saw that they were put to the worse before Israel, they made peace with Israel,  served them. So the Syrians were afraid to help the sons of Ammon any more.
And it came to pass, at the return of the year, at the time when kings go out to battle, that David sent Joab,  his servants with him,  all Israel. And they destroyed the sons of Ammon,  besieged Rabbah. But David remained at Jerusalem.
And it came to pass at evening, that David arose from off his bed,  walked upon the roof of the king's house. And from the roof he saw a woman bathing,  the woman was very beautiful to look upon.
And David sent and inquired after the woman. And one said, Is not this Bathsheba, the daughter of Eliam, the wife of Uriah the Hittite?
And David sent messengers,  took her. And she came in to him,  he lay with her (for she was purified from her uncleanness),  she returned to her house.
And the woman conceived. And she sent and told David,  said, I am with child.
And David sent to Joab, saying, Send me Uriah the Hittite. And Joab sent Uriah to David.
And when Uriah came to him, David asked of him how Joab did,  how the people fared,  how the war prospered.
And David said to Uriah, Go down to thy house,  wash thy feet. And Uriah departed out of the king's house,  a gift from the king followed him.
But Uriah slept at the door of the king's house with all the servants of his lord,  did not go down to his house.
And when they had told David, saying, Uriah did not go down to his house, David said to Uriah, Have thou not come from a journey? Why did thou not go down to thy house?
And Uriah said to David, The ark,  Israel,  Judah, abide in booths,  my lord Joab,  the servants of my lord, are encamped in the open field. Shall I then go into my house, to eat and to drink,  to lie with my wife? As thou live,  as thy soul lives, I will not do this thing.
And David said to Uriah, Remain here today also,  tomorrow I will let thee depart. So Uriah abode in Jerusalem that day,  the morrow.
And when David had called him, he ate and drank before him,  he made him drunk. And at evening he went out to lie on his bed with the servants of his lord,  did not go down to his house.
And it came to pass in the morning, that David wrote a letter to Joab,  sent it by the hand of Uriah.
And he wrote in the letter, saying, Set ye Uriah in the forefront of the hottest battle,  retire ye from him, that he may be smitten,  die.
And it came to pass, when Joab kept watch upon the city, that he assigned Uriah to the place where he knew that valiant men were.
And the men of the city went out,  fought with Joab. And there fell some of the people, even of the servants of David,  Uriah the Hittite died also.
Then Joab sent and told David all the things concerning the war.
And he charged the messenger, saying, When thou have made an end of telling all the things concerning the war to the king,
it shall be that, if the king's wrath arise,  he says to thee, Why did ye go so near to the city to fight? Did ye not know that they would shoot from the wall?
Who smote Abimelech the son of Jerubbesheth? Did not a woman cast an upper millstone upon him from the wall so that he died at Thebez? Why did ye go so near the wall? Then thou shall say, Thy servant Uriah the Hittite is dead also.
So the messenger went,  came and told David all that Joab had sent him.
And the messenger said to David, The men prevailed against us,  came out to us into the field,  we were upon them even to the entrance of the gate.
And the shooters shot at thy servants from off the wall. And some of the king's servants are dead,  thy servant Uriah the Hittite is dead also.
Then David said to the messenger, Thus thou shall say to Joab, Let not this thing displease thee, for the sword devours one as well as another. Make thy battle stronger against the city,  overthrow it. And encourage thou him.
And when the wife of Uriah heard that Uriah her husband was dead, she made lamentation for her husband.
And when the mourning was past, David sent and took her home to his house,  she became his wife,  bore him a son. But the thing that David had done displeased Jehovah.
And Jehovah sent Nathan to David. And he came to him,  said to him, There were two men in one city: the one rich,  the other poor.
The rich man had exceedingly many flocks and herds,
but the poor man had nothing except one little ewe lamb, which he had bought and nourished up. And it grew up together with him,  with his sons. It ate of his own morsel,  drank of his own cup,  lay in his bosom,  was to him as a daughter.
And there came a traveler to the rich man,  he spared to take of his own flock and of his own herd to dress for the wayfaring man who came to him,  took the poor man's lamb,  dressed it for the man who came to him.
And David's anger was greatly kindled against the man,  he said to Nathan, As Jehovah lives, the man who has done this is worthy to die.
And he shall restore the lamb fourfold, because he did this thing,  because he had no pity.
And Nathan said to David, Thou are the man. Thus says Jehovah, the God of Israel, I anointed thee king over Israel,  I delivered thee out of the hand of Saul.
And I gave thee thy master's house,  thy master's wives into thy bosom,  gave thee the house of Israel and of Judah. And if that had been too little, I would have added to thee such and such things.
Why have thou despised the word of Jehovah, to do that which is evil in his sight? Thou have smitten Uriah the Hittite with the sword,  have taken his wife to be thy wife,  have slain him with the sword of the sons of Ammon.
Now therefore the sword shall never depart from thy house, because thou have despised me,  have taken the wife of Uriah the Hittite to be thy wife.
Thus says Jehovah, Behold, I will raise up evil against thee out of thine own house. And I will take thy wives before thine eyes,  give them to thy neighbor,  he shall lie with thy wives in the sight of this sun.
For thou did it secretly,  I will do this thing before all Israel,  before the sun.
And David said to Nathan, I have sinned against Jehovah. And Nathan said to David, Jehovah also has put away thy sin; thou shall not die.
However, because by this deed thou have given great occasion to the enemies of Jehovah to blaspheme, the child also that is born to thee shall surely die.
And Nathan departed to his house. And Jehovah struck the child that Uriah's wife bore to David,  it was very sick.
David therefore besought God for the child. And David fasted,  went in,  lay all night upon the ground.
And the elders of his house arose,  stood beside him, to raise him up from the ground,  he would not, neither did he eat bread with them.
And it came to pass on the seventh day, that the child died. And the servants of David feared to tell him that the child was dead, for they said, Behold, while the child was yet alive we spoke to him,  he did not hearken to our voice, how will he then vex himself, if we tell him that the child is dead!
But when David saw that his servants were whispering together, David perceived that the child was dead. And David said to his servants, Is the child dead? And they said, He is dead.
Then David arose from the earth,  washed,  anointed himself,  changed his apparel. And he came into the house of Jehovah,  worshiped. Then he came to his own house,  when he required, they set bread before him,  he ate.
Then his servants said to him, What thing is this that thou have done? Thou fasted and wept for the child while it was alive,  when the child was dead, thou arose and ate bread.
And he said, While the child was yet alive, I fasted and wept. For I said, Who knows whether Jehovah will not be gracious to me, that the child may live?
But now he is dead; why should I fast? Can I bring him back again? I shall go to him,  he will not return to me.
And David comforted Bathsheba his wife,  went in to her,  lay with her. And she bore a son,  he called his name Solomon. And Jehovah loved him,
and he sent by the hand of Nathan the prophet. And he called his name Jedidiah, for Jehovah's sake.
Now Joab fought against Rabbah of the sons of Ammon,  took the royal city.
And Joab sent messengers to David,  said, I have fought against Rabbah; yea, I have taken the city of waters.
Now therefore gather the rest of the people together,  encamp against the city,  take it, lest I take the city,  it be called after my name.
And David gathered all the people together,  went to Rabbah,  fought against it,  took it.
And he took the crown of their king from off his head. And the weight of it was a talent of gold,  in it were precious stones. And it was set on David's head. And he brought forth the spoil of the city, exceedingly much.
And he brought forth the people that were in it,  put them under saws,  under harrows of iron,  under axes of iron,  made them pass through the brick-kiln. And thus he did to all the cities of the sons of Ammon. And David and all the people returned to Jerusalem.
And it came to pass after this, that Absalom the son of David had a fair sister whose name was Tamar. And Amnon the son of David loved her.
And Amnon was so frustrated that he fell sick because of his sister Tamar. For she was a virgin,  it seemed hard to Amnon to do anything to her.
But Amnon had a friend whose name was Jonadab, the son of Shimeah, David's brother. And Jonadab was a very sly man.
And he said to him, Why, O son of the king, are thou emaciated this way from day to day? Will thou not tell me? And Amnon said to him, I love Tamar, my brother Absalom's sister.
And Jonadab said to him, Lie down on thy bed,  feign thyself sick. And when thy father comes to see thee, say to him, Let my sister Tamar come, I pray thee,  give me bread to eat,  dress the food in my sight, that I may see it,  eat it from her hand.
So Amnon lay down,  feigned himself sick. And when the king came to see him, Amnon said to the king, Let my sister Tamar come, I pray thee,  make me a couple of cakes in my sight, that I may eat from her hand.
Then David sent home to Tamar, saying, Go now to thy brother Amnon's house,  make food for him.
So Tamar went to her brother Amnon's house,  he was laid down. And she took dough,  kneaded it,  made cakes in his sight,  baked the cakes.
And she took the pan,  poured them out before him,  he refused to eat. And Amnon said, Have all men out from me. And they went out every man from him.
And Amnon said to Tamar, Bring the food into the chamber that I may eat from thy hand. And Tamar took the cakes that she had made,  brought them into the chamber to Amnon her brother.
And when she had brought them near to him to eat, he took hold of her,  said to her, Come, lie with me, my sister.
And she answered him, No, my brother, do not force me, for no such thing ought to be done in Israel. Do not do thou this folly.
And I, where shall I carry my shame? And as for thee, thou will be as one of the fools in Israel. Now therefore, I pray thee, speak to the king, for he will not withhold me from thee.
However he would not hearken to her voice,  being stronger than she, he forced her,  lay with her.
Then Amnon hated her with exceedingly great hatred, for the hatred with which he hated her was greater than the love with which he had loved her. And Amnon said to her, Arise, be gone.
And she said to him, Not so, because this great wrong in putting me forth is worse than the other that thou did to me. But he would not hearken to her.
Then he called his servant who ministered to him,  said, Put this woman out from me now,  bolt the door after her.
And she had a garment of various colors upon her, for with such robes were the king's daughters who were virgins appareled. Then his servant brought her out,  bolted the door after her.
And Tamar put ashes on her head,  tore her garment of various colors that was on her. And she laid her hand on her head,  went her way, crying aloud as she went.
And Absalom her brother said to her, Has Amnon thy brother been with thee? But now hold thy peace, my sister. He is thy brother. Do not take this thing to heart. So Tamar remained desolate in her brother Absalom's house.
But when king David heard of all these things, he was very angry.
And Absalom spoke to Amnon neither good nor bad, for Absalom hated Amnon, because he had forced his sister Tamar.
And it came to pass after two full years, that Absalom had sheep-shearers in Baal-hazor, which is beside Ephraim,  Absalom invited all the king's sons.
And Absalom came to the king,  said, Behold now, thy servant has sheep-shearers. Let the king, I pray thee,  his servants go with thy servant.
And the king said to Absalom, No, my son, let us not all go, lest we be burdensome to thee. And he pressed him. However he would not go,  blessed him.
Then Absalom said, If not, I pray thee, let my brother Amnon go with us. And the king said to him, Why should he go with thee?
But Absalom pressed him,  he let Amnon and all the king's sons go with him.
And Absalom commanded his servants, saying, Notice ye now, when Amnon's heart is merry with wine,  when I say to you, Smite Amnon, then kill him. Fear not; have I not commanded you? Be courageous,  be valiant.
And the servants of Absalom did to Amnon as Absalom had commanded. Then all the king's sons arose,  every man got up upon his mule,  fled.
And it came to pass, while they were in the way, that the news came to David, saying, Absalom has slain all the king's sons,  there is not one of them left.
Then the king arose,  tore his garments,  lay on the earth,  all his servants stood by with their clothes torn.
And Jonadab, the son of Shimeah, David's brother, answered and said, Let not my lord suppose that they have killed all the young men the king's sons, for Amnon only is dead. For by the command of Absalom this has been determined from the day that he forced his sister Tamar.
Now therefore let not my lord the king take the thing to his heart, to think that all the king's sons are dead, for only Amnon is dead.
But Absalom fled. And the young man who kept the watch lifted up his eyes,  looked, , behold, there came much people by the way of the hill-side behind him.
And Jonadab said to the king, Behold, the king's sons have come; as thy servant said, so it is.
And it came to pass, as soon as he had made an end of speaking, that, behold, the king's sons came,  lifted up their voice,  wept. And the king also and all his servants wept very much.
But Absalom fled,  went to Talmai the son of Ammihur, king of Geshur. And David mourned for his son every day.
So Absalom fled,  went to Geshur,  was there three years.
And the soul of king David longed to go forth to Absalom, for he was comforted concerning Amnon, seeing he was dead.
Now Joab the son of Zeruiah perceived that the king's heart was toward Absalom.
And Joab sent to Tekoa,  fetched from there a wise woman,  said to her, I pray thee, feign thyself to be a mourner,  put on mourning apparel, I pray thee,  do not anoint thyself with oil,  be as a woman who has a long time mourned for the dead.
And go in to the king,  speak on this manner to him. So Joab put the words in her mouth.
And when the woman of Tekoa spoke to the king, she fell on her face to the ground,  did obeisance,  said, Help, O king.
And the king said to her, What troubles thee? And she answered, Of a truth I am a widow,  my husband is dead.
And thy handmaid had two sons,  they two strove together in the field,  there was none to part them,  the one smote the other,  killed him.
And, behold, the whole family is risen against thy handmaid,  they say, Deliver him who smote his brother that we may kill him for the life of his brother whom he killed,  so destroy the heir also. Thus they will quench my coal which is left,  will leave to my husband neither name nor remainder upon the face of the earth.
And the king said to the woman, Go to thy house,  I will give charge concerning thee.
And the woman of Tekoa said to the king, My lord, O king, the iniquity be on me,  on my father's house,  the king and his throne be guiltless.
And the king said, Whoever says anything to thee, bring him to me,  he shall not touch thee any more.
Then she said, I pray thee, let the king remember Jehovah thy God, that the avenger of blood not destroy any more, lest they destroy my son. And he said, As Jehovah lives, there shall not one hair of thy son fall to the earth.
Then the woman said, Let thy handmaid, I pray thee, speak a word to my lord the king. And he said, Say on.
And the woman said, Why then have thou devised such a thing against the people of God? For in speaking this word the king is as he who is guilty, in that the king does not fetch home again his banished one.
For we must die,  are as water split on the ground, which cannot be gathered up again, neither does God take away life,  devises means that he who is banished be not an outcast from him.
Now therefore seeing that I have come to speak this word to my lord the king, it is because the people have made me afraid. And thy handmaid said, I will now speak to the king. It may be that the king will perform the request of his servant.
For the king will hear to deliver his servant out of the hand of the man who would destroy me and my son together out of the inheritance of God.
Then thy handmaid said, Let, I pray thee, the word of my lord the king be gracious, for as an agent of God, so is my lord the king to discern good and bad. And Jehovah thy God be with thee.
Then the king answered and said to the woman, Hide not from me, I pray thee, anything that I shall ask thee. And the woman said, Let my lord the king now speak.
And the king said, Is the hand of Joab with thee in all this? And the woman answered and said, As thy soul lives, my lord the king, none can turn to the right hand or to the left from anything that my lord the king has spoken, for thy servant Joab, he bade me,  he put all these words in the mouth of thy handmaid.
Thy servant Joab has done this thing to change the face of the matter. And my lord is wise, according to the wisdom of an agent of God, to know all things that are on the earth.
And the king said to Joab, Behold now, I have done this thing. Go therefore, bring the young man Absalom back.
And Joab fell to the ground on his face,  did obeisance,  blessed the king. And Joab said, Today thy servant knows that I have found favor in thy sight, my lord, O king, in that the king has performed the request of his servant.
So Joab arose and went to Geshur,  brought Absalom to Jerusalem.
And the king said, Let him turn to his own house,  let him not see my face. So Absalom turned to his own house,  did not see the king's face.
Now in all Israel there was none to be so much praised as Absalom for his beauty; from the sole of his foot even to the crown of his head there was no blemish in him.
And when he cut the hair of his head (now it was at every year's end that he cut it, because it was heavy on him, therefore he cut it), he weighed the hair of his head at two hundred shekels, after the king's weight.
And to Absalom there were born three sons,  one daughter whose name was Tamar. She was a woman of a fair countenance.
And Absalom dwelt two full years in Jerusalem,  he did not see the king's face.
Then Absalom sent for Joab to send him to the king,  he would not come to him. And he sent again a second time,  he would not come.
Therefore he said to his servants, See, Joab's field is near mine,  he has barley there. Go and set it on fire. And Absalom's servants set the field on fire.
Then Joab arose,  came to Absalom to his house,  said to him, Why have thy servants set my field on fire?
And Absalom answered Joab, Behold, I sent to thee, saying, Come here, that I may send thee to the king to say, Why have I come from Geshur? It were better for me to still be there. Now therefore let me see the king's face,  if there be iniquity in me, let him kill me.
So Joab came to the king,  told him. And when he had called for Absalom, he came to the king,  bowed himself on his face to the ground before the king. And the king kissed Absalom.
And it came to pass after this, that Absalom prepared for him a chariot and horses,  fifty men to run before him.
And Absalom rose up early,  stood beside the way of the gate. And it was so, that, when any man had a suit which should come to the king for judgment, then Absalom called to him,  said, Of what city are thou? And he said, Thy servant is of one of the tribes of Israel.
And Absalom said to him, See, thy matters are good and right,  there is no man appointed by the king to hear thee.
Absalom said moreover, Oh that I were made judge in the land, that every man who has any suit or case might come to me,  I would do for him justice!
And it was so, that, when any man came near to do him obeisance, he put forth his hand,  took hold of him,  kissed him.
And on this manner Absalom did to all Israel who came to the king for judgment. So Absalom stole the hearts of the men of Israel.
And it came to pass at the end of forty years, that Absalom said to the king, I pray thee, let me go and pay my vow, which I have vowed to Jehovah, in Hebron.
For thy servant vowed a vow while I abode at Geshur in Syria, saying, If Jehovah shall indeed bring me again to Jerusalem, then I will serve Jehovah.
And the king said to him, Go in peace. So he arose,  went to Hebron.
But Absalom sent spies throughout all the tribes of Israel, saying, As soon as ye hear the sound of the trumpet, then ye shall say, Absalom is king in Hebron.
And with Absalom went two hundred men out of Jerusalem who were invited,  went in their simplicity. And they did not know anything.
And Absalom sent for Ahithophel the Gilonite, David's counselor, from his city, even from Giloh, while he was offering the sacrifices. And the conspiracy was strong, for the people increased continually with Absalom.
And there came a messenger to David, saying, The hearts of the men of Israel are after Absalom.
And David said to all his servants who were with him at Jerusalem, Arise,  let us flee, for otherwise none of us shall escape from Absalom. Make speed to depart, lest he overtake us quickly,  bring down evil upon us,  smite the city with the edge of the sword.
And the king's servants said to the king, Behold, thy servants are ready to do whatever my lord the king shall choose.
And the king went forth,  all his household after him. And the king left ten women, who were concubines, to keep the house.
And the king went forth,  all the people after him,  they remained in Beth-merhak.
And all his servants passed on beside him; and all the Cherethites,  all the Pelethites,  all the Gittites, six hundred men who came after him from Gath, passed on before the king.
Then the king said to Ittai the Gittite, Why do thou also go with us? Return,  abide with the king, for thou are a foreigner,  also an exile. Return to thine own place.
Whereas thou came but yesterday, should I this day make thee go up and down with us, seeing I go where I may? Return thou,  take back thy brothers. Mercy and truth be with thee.
And Ittai answered the king,  said, As Jehovah lives,  as my lord the king lives, surely in what place my lord the king shall be, whether for death or for life, even there thy servant will also be.
And David said to Ittai, Go and pass over. And Ittai the Gittite passed over,  all his men,  all the little ones that were with him.
And all the country wept with a loud voice,  all the people passed over. The king himself also passed over the brook Kidron,  all the people passed over toward the way of the wilderness.
And, lo, Zadok also came,  all the Levites with him, bearing the ark of the covenant of God. And they set down the ark of God,  Abiathar went up until all the people had finished passing out of the city.
And the king said to Zadok, Carry back the ark of God into the city. If I shall find favor in the eyes of Jehovah he will bring me again,  show me both it,  his habitation.
But if he says thus, I have no delight in thee, behold, here I am. Let him do to me as seems good to him.
The king said also to Zadok the priest, Are thou not a seer? Return into the city in peace,  your two sons with you, Ahimaaz thy son,  Jonathan the son of Abiathar.
See, I will remain at the fords of the wilderness until there comes word from you to report to me.
Therefore Zadok and Abiathar carried the ark of God again to Jerusalem,  they abode there.
And David went up by the ascent of the mount of Olives,  wept as he went up,  he had his head covered,  went barefoot. And all the people who were with him covered every man his head,  they went up, weeping as they went up.
And it was told David, saying, Ahithophel is among the conspirators with Absalom. And David said, O Jehovah, I pray thee, turn the counsel of Ahithophel into foolishness.
And it came to pass, that, when David came to the top of the ascent, where God was worshiped, behold, Hushai the Archite came to meet him with his coat torn,  dirt upon his head.
And David said to him, If thou pass on with me, then thou will be a burden to me,
but if thou return to the city,  say to Absalom, I will be thy servant, O king. As I have been thy father's servant in time past, so I will now be thy servant, then thou will defeat for me the counsel of Ahithophel.
And have thou not there with thee Zadok and Abiathar the priests? Therefore it shall be, that whatever thing thou shall hear out of the king's house, thou shall tell it to Zadok and Abiathar the priests.
Behold, they have there with them their two sons, Ahimaaz, Zadok's son,  Jonathan, Abiathar's son. And by them ye shall send to me everything that ye shall hear.
So Hushai, David's friend, came into the city,  Absalom came into Jerusalem.
And when David was a little past the top of the ascent, behold, Ziba the servant of Mephibosheth met him with a couple of saddled donkeys,  upon them two hundred loaves of bread,  a hundred clusters of raisins,  a hundred of summer fruits,  a bottle of wine.
And the king said to Ziba, What do thou mean by these? And Ziba said, The donkeys are for the king's household to ride on,  the bread and summer fruit for the young men to eat,  the wine, that such as are faint in the wilderness may drink.
And the king said, And where is thy master's son? And Ziba said to the king, Behold, he abides at Jerusalem, for he said, Today the house of Israel will restore for me the kingdom of my father.
Then the king said to Ziba, Behold, all that pertains to Mephibosheth is thine. And Ziba said, I do obeisance. Let me find favor in thy sight, my lord, O king.
And when king David came to Bahurim, behold, there came out from there a man of the family of the house of Saul whose name was Shimei, the son of Gera. He came out, cursing as he came.
And he cast stones at David,  at all the servants of king David,  all the people and all the mighty men were on his right hand and on his left.
And thus said Shimei when he cursed, Begone, begone, thou man of blood,  base fellow.
Jehovah has returned upon thee all the blood of the house of Saul in whose stead thou have reigned. And Jehovah has delivered the kingdom into the hand of Absalom thy son, , behold, thou are taken in thine own mischief because thou are a man of blood.
Then Abishai the son of Zeruiah said to the king, Why should this dead dog curse my lord the king? Let me go over, I pray thee,  take off his head.
And the king said, What have I to do with you, ye sons of Zeruiah? Because he curses,  because Jehovah has said to him, Curse David, who then shall say, Why have thou done so?
And David said to Abishai,  to all his servants, Behold, my son, who came forth from my bowels, seeks my life. How much more this Benjamite? Let him alone,  let him curse, for Jehovah has bidden him.
It may be that Jehovah will look on the wrong done to me,  that Jehovah will reward me good for his cursing of me this day.
So David and his men went by the way,  Shimei went along on the hill-side opposite him,  cursed as he went,  threw stones at him,  cast dust.
And the king,  all the people who were with him, came weary,  he refreshed himself there.
And Absalom,  all the people, the men of Israel, came to Jerusalem,  Ahithophel with him.
And it came to pass, when Hushai the Archite, David's friend, came to Absalom, that Hushai said to Absalom, Live, O king. Live, O king.
And Absalom said to Hushai, Is this thy kindness to thy friend? Why did thou not go with thy friend?
And Hushai said to Absalom, No,  whom Jehovah,  this people,  all the men of Israel have chosen, his will I be,  with him I will abide.
And again, whom should I serve? Is it not in the presence of his son? As I have served in thy father's presence, so I will be in thy presence.
Then Absalom said to Ahithophel, Give your counsel what we shall do.
And Ahithophel said to Absalom, Go in to thy father's concubines that he has left to keep the house,  all Israel will hear that thou are abhorred by thy father. Then the hands of all who are with thee will be strong.
So they spread Absalom a tent upon the top of the house,  Absalom went in to his father's concubines in the sight of all Israel.
And the counsel of Ahithophel, which he gave in those days, was as if a man inquired at the oracle of God; so was all the counsel of Ahithophel both with David and with Absalom.
Moreover Ahithophel said to Absalom, Let me now choose out twelve thousand men,  I will arise and pursue after David this night.
And I will come upon him while he is weary and weak-handed,  will make him afraid. And all the people who are with him shall flee. And I will only smite the king,
and I will bring back all the people to thee. The man whom thou seek is as if all returned, so all the people shall be in peace.
And the saying pleased Absalom well,  all the elders of Israel.
Then Absalom said, Call now Hushai the Archite also,  let us hear likewise what he says.
And when Hushai came to Absalom, Absalom spoke to him, saying, Ahithophel has spoken after this manner. Shall we do after his saying? If not, speak thou.
And Hushai said to Absalom, The counsel that Ahithophel has given this time is not good.
Hushai said moreover, Thou know thy father and his men, that they are mighty men,  they are chafed in their minds, as a bear robbed of her whelps in the field. And thy father is a man of war,  will not lodge with the people.
Behold, he is hid now in some pit, or in some other place. And it will come to pass, when some of them are fallen at the first, that whoever hears it will say, There is a slaughter among the people who follow Absalom.
And even he who is valiant, whose heart is as the heart of a lion, will utterly melt, for all Israel knows that thy father is a mighty man,  those who are with him are valiant men.
But I counsel that all Israel be gathered together to thee, from Dan even to Beersheba, as the sand that is by the sea for multitude,  that thou go to battle in thine own person.
So we shall come upon him in some place where he shall be found,  we will light upon him as the dew falls on the ground,  of him and of all the men who are with him we will not leave so much as one.
Moreover, if he be gotten into a city, then all Israel shall bring ropes to that city,  we will draw it into the river until there be not one small stone found there.
And Absalom and all the men of Israel said, The counsel of Hushai the Archite is better than the counsel of Ahithophel. For Jehovah had ordained to defeat the good counsel of Ahithophel, to the intent that Jehovah might bring evil upon Absalom.
Then Hushai said to Zadok and to Abiathar the priests, Thus and thus did Ahithophel counsel Absalom and the elders of Israel,  thus and thus have I counseled.
Now therefore send quickly,  tell David, saying, Do not lodge this night at the fords of the wilderness,  by all means pass over, lest the king be swallowed up,  all the people who are with him.
Now Jonathan and Ahimaaz were staying by En-rogel. And a maid-servant used to go and tell them,  they went and told king David, for they might not be seen to come into the city.
But a lad saw them,  told Absalom. And they went away quickly, both of them,  came to the house of a man in Bahurim who had a well in his court,  they went down there.
And the woman took and spread the covering over the well's mouth,  spread ground grain on it. And nothing was known.
And Absalom's servants came to the woman to the house,  they said, Where are Ahimaaz and Jonathan? And the woman said to them, They have gone over the brook of water. And when they had sought and could not find them, they returned to Jerusalem.
And it came to pass, after they were departed, that they came up out of the well,  went and told king David. And they said to David, Arise ye,  pass quickly over the water, for thus Ahithophel has counseled against you.
Then David arose,  all the people who were with him,  they passed over the Jordan. By the morning light there lacked not one of them who was not gone over the Jordan.
And when Ahithophel saw that his counsel was not followed, he saddled his donkey,  arose,  got home to his city,  set his house in order,  hanged himself. And he died,  was buried in the sepulcher of his father.
Then David came to Mahanaim. And Absalom passed over the Jordan, he and all the men of Israel with him.
And Absalom set Amasa over the army instead of Joab. Now Amasa was the son of a man, whose name was Ithra the Israelite, who went in to Abigal the daughter of Nahash, sister to Zeruiah, Joab's mother.
And Israel and Absalom encamped in the land of Gilead.
And it came to pass, when David came to Mahanaim, that Shobi the son of Nahash of Rabbah of the sons of Ammon,  Machir the son of Ammiel of Lodebar,  Barzillai the Gileadite of Rogelim,
brought beds,  basins,  earthen vessels,  wheat,  barley,  meal,  roasted grain,  beans,  lentils,  roasted pulse,
and honey,  butter,  sheep,  cheese of the herd, for David,  for the people who were with him, to eat. For they said, The people are hungry,  weary,  thirsty, in the wilderness.
And David numbered the people who were with him,  set captains of thousands and captains of hundreds over them.
And David sent forth the people, a third part under the hand of Joab,  a third part under the hand of Abishai the son of Zeruiah, Joab's brother,  a third part under the hand of Ittai the Gittite. And the king said to the people, I will surely go forth with you myself also.
But the people said, Thou shall not go forth. For if we flee away, they will not care for us, neither if half of us die, will they care for us,  thou are worth ten thousand of us. Therefore now it is better that thou be ready to help us out of the city.
And the king said to them, What seems best to you I will do. And the king stood by the gate-side,  all the people went out by hundreds and by thousands.
And the king commanded Joab and Abishai and Ittai, saying, Deal gently for my sake with the young man, even with Absalom. And all the people heard when the king gave all the captains charge concerning Absalom.
So the people went out into the field against Israel,  the battle was in the forest of Ephraim.
And the people of Israel were smitten there before the servants of David,  there was a great slaughter there that day of twenty thousand men.
For the battle was there spread over the face of all the country,  the forest devoured more people that day than the sword devoured.
And Absalom chanced to meet the servants of David. And Absalom was riding upon his mule,  the mule went under the thick boughs of a great oak,  his head caught hold of the oak. And he was taken up between sky and earth,  the mule that was under him went on.
And a certain man saw it,  told Joab,  said, Behold, I saw Absalom hanging in an oak.
And Joab said to the man who told him, , behold, thou saw it,  why did thou not smite him there to the ground? And I would have given thee ten pieces of silver,  a belt.
And the man said to Joab, Though I should receive a thousand pieces of silver in my hand, yet I would not put forth my hand against the king's son, for in our hearing the king charged thee and Abishai and Ittai, saying, Beware that none touch the young man Absalom.
Otherwise if I had dealt falsely against his life (and there is no matter hid from the king), then thou thyself would have set thyself against me.
Then Joab said, I will not delay thus with thee. And he took three darts in his hand,  thrust them through the heart of Absalom while he was yet alive in the midst of the oak.
And ten young men who bore Joab's armor encompassed about and smote Absalom,  killed him.
And Joab blew the trumpet,  the people returned from pursuing after Israel, for Joab held back the people.
And they took Absalom,  cast him into the great pit in the forest,  raised over him a very great heap of stones. And all Israel fled every man to his tent.
Now Absalom in his lifetime had taken and reared up for himself the pillar which is in the king's valley, for he said, I have no son to keep my name in remembrance. And he called the pillar after his own name,  it is called Absalom's monument to this day.
Then Ahimaaz the son of Zadok said, Let me now run,  bear the king news, how that Jehovah has avenged him of his enemies.
And Joab said to him, Thou shall not be the bearer of news this day,  thou shall bear news another day. But this day thou shall bear no news, because the king's son is dead.
Then Joab said to the Cushite, Go, tell the king what thou have seen. And the Cushite bowed himself to Joab,  ran.
Then Ahimaaz the son of Zadok said yet again to Joab, But come what may, let me, I pray thee, also run after the Cushite. And Joab said, Why will thou run, my son, seeing that thou will have no reward for the news?
But come what may, he said, I will run. And he said to him, Run. Then Ahimaaz ran by the way of the Plain,  outran the Cushite.
Now David was sitting between the two gates. And the watchman went up to the roof of the gate to the wall,  lifted up his eyes,  looked, , behold, a man running alone.
And the watchman cried,  told the king. And the king said, If he is alone, there is news in his mouth. And he came apace,  drew near.
And the watchman saw another man running. And the watchman called to the porter,  said, Behold, another man running alone. And the king said, He also brings news.
And the watchman said, I think the running of the foremost is like the running of Ahimaaz the son of Zadok. And the king said, He is a good man,  comes with good news.
And Ahimaaz called,  said to the king, All is well. And he bowed himself before the king with his face to the earth,  said, Blessed be Jehovah thy God, who has delivered up the men who lifted up their hand against my lord the king.
And the king said, Is it well with the young man Absalom? And Ahimaaz answered, When Joab sent the king's servant, even me thy servant, I saw a great tumult,  I knew not what it was.
And the king said, Turn aside,  stand here. And he turned aside,  stood still.
And, behold, the Cushite came. And the Cushite said, News for my lord the king, for Jehovah has avenged thee this day of all those who rose up against thee.
And the king said to the Cushite, Is it well with the young man Absalom? And the Cushite answered, The enemies of my lord the king,  all who rise up against thee to do thee hurt, be as that young man is.
And the king was much moved,  went up to the chamber over the gate,  wept. And as he went, thus he said, O my son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom! Would I had died for thee, O Absalom, my son, my son!
And it was told Joab, Behold, the king weeps and mourns for Absalom.
And the victory that day was turned into mourning to all the people, for the people heard say that day, The king grieves for his son.
And the people slipped away that day into the city, as people who are ashamed sneak away when they flee in battle.
And the king covered his face,  the king cried with a loud voice, O my son Absalom, O Absalom, my son, my son!
And Joab came into the house to the king,  said, Thou have shamed this day the faces of all thy servants, who this day have saved thy life,  the lives of thy sons and of thy daughters,  the lives of thy wives,  the lives of thy concubines,
in that thou love those who hate thee,  hate those who love thee. For thou have declared this day that rulers and servants are nothing to thee. For this day I perceive, that if Absalom had lived,  all we had died this day, then it would have pleased thee well.
Now therefore arise, go forth,  speak graciously to thy servants. For I swear by Jehovah, if thou do not go forth, there will not remain a man with thee this night. And that will be worse to thee than all the evil that has befallen thee from thy youth until now.
Then the king arose,  sat in the gate. And they told to all the people, saying, Behold, the king is sitting in the gate. And all the people came before the king. Now Israel had fled every man to his tent.
And all the people were contending throughout all the tribes of Israel, saying, The king delivered us out of the hand of our enemies,  he saved us out of the hand of the Philistines. And now he fled out of the land from Absalom.
And Absalom, whom we anointed over us, is dead in battle. Now therefore why speak ye not a word of bringing the king back?
And king David sent to Zadok and to Abiathar the priests, saying, Speak to the elders of Judah, saying, Why are ye the last to bring the king back to his house? Since the speech of all Israel has come to the king, to bring him to his house.
Ye are my brothers, ye are my bone and my flesh. Why then are ye the last to bring back the king?
And say ye to Amasa, Are thou not my bone and my flesh? God do so to me,  more also, if thou not be captain of the army before me continually in the place of Joab.
And he inclined the heart of all the men of Judah, even as the heart of one man, so that they sent to the king, saying, Return thou,  all thy servants.
So the king returned,  came to the Jordan. And Judah came to Gilgal, to go to meet the king, to bring the king over the Jordan.
And Shimei the son of Gera, the Benjamite, who was of Bahurim, hastened and came down with the men of Judah to meet king David.
And there were a thousand men of Benjamin with him,  Ziba the servant of the house of Saul,  his fifteen sons and his twenty servants with him. And they went through the Jordan in the presence of the king.
And there went over a ferry-boat to bring over the king's household,  to do what he thought good. And Shimei the son of Gera fell down before the king when he came over the Jordan.
And he said to the king, Let not my lord impute iniquity to me, neither remember thou that which thy servant did perversely the day that my lord the king went out of Jerusalem, that the king should take it to his heart.
For thy servant knows that I have sinned. Therefore, behold, I have come this day the first of all the house of Joseph to go down to meet my lord the king.
But Abishai the son of Zeruiah answered and said, Shall not Shimei be put to death for this, because he cursed Jehovah's anointed?
And David said, What have I to do with you, ye sons of Zeruiah, that ye should this day be adversaries to me? Shall there any man be put to death this day in Israel? For do I not know that I am this day king over Israel?
And the king said to Shimei, Thou shall not die. And the king swore to him.
And Mephibosheth the son of Saul came down to meet the king. And he had neither dressed his feet, nor trimmed his beard, nor washed his clothes, from the day the king departed until the day he came home in peace.
And it came to pass, when he came to Jerusalem to meet the king, that the king said to him, Why did thou not go with me, Mephibosheth?
And he answered, My lord, O king, my servant deceived me. For thy servant said, I will saddle for me a donkey, that I may ride on it,  go with the king, because thy servant is lame.
And he has slandered thy servant to my lord the king. But my lord the king is as an agent of God; do therefore what is good in thine eyes.
For all my father's house were but dead men before my lord the king. Yet thou set thy servant among those who ate at thine own table. What right therefore have I yet that I should cry any more to the king?
And the king said to him, Why do thou speak any more of thy matters? I say, thou and Ziba divide the land.
And Mephibosheth said to the king, Yea, let him take all, inasmuch as my lord the king has come in peace to his own house.
And Barzillai the Gileadite came down from Rogelim. And he went over the Jordan with the king to conduct him over the Jordan.
Now Barzillai was a very aged man, even eighty years old. And he had provided the king with sustenance while he lay at Mahanaim, for he was a very great man of wealth.
And the king said to Barzillai, Come thou over with me,  I will sustain thee with me in Jerusalem.
And Barzillai said to the king, How many are the days of the years of my life that I should go up with the king to Jerusalem?
I am this day eighty years old. Can I discern between good and bad? Can thy servant taste what I eat or what I drink? Can I hear any more the voice of singing men and singing women? Why then should thy servant be yet a burden to my lord the king?
Thy servant would but just go over the Jordan with the king,  why should the king recompense it to me with such a reward?
Let thy servant, I pray thee, turn back again, that I may die in my own city by the grave of my father and my mother. But behold, thy servant Chimham, let him go over with my lord the king,  do to him what shall seem good to thee.
And the king answered, Chimham shall go over with me,  I will do to him that which shall seem good to thee. And whatever thou shall require of me, that I will do for thee.
And all the people went over the Jordan,  the king went over. And the king kissed Barzillai,  blessed him,  he returned to his own place.
So the king went over to Gilgal,  Chimham went over with him. And all the people of Judah brought the king over,  also half the people of Israel.
And, behold, all the men of Israel came to the king,  said to the king, Why have our brothers the men of Judah stolen thee away,  brought the king,  his household, over the Jordan,  all David's men with him?
And all the men of Judah answered the men of Israel, Because the king is near of kin to us. Why then are ye angry for this matter? Have we eaten at all at the king's cost, or has he given us any gift?
And the men of Israel answered the men of Judah,  said, We have ten parts in the king,  we have also more right in David than ye. Why then did ye despise us, that our advice should not be had first in bringing back our king? And the words of the men of Judah were fiercer than the words of the men of Israel.
And there happened to be there a base fellow whose name was Sheba, the son of Bichri, a Benjamite. And he blew the trumpet,  said, We have no portion in David, neither have we inheritance in the son of Jesse. Every man to his tents, O Israel.
So all the men of Israel went up from following David,  followed Sheba the son of Bichri,  the men of Judah clung to their king, from the Jordan even to Jerusalem.
And David came to his house at Jerusalem. And the king took the ten women his concubines, whom he had left to keep the house,  put them in ward,  provided them with sustenance,  did not go in to them. So they were shut up to the day of their death, living in widowhood.
Then the king said to Amasa, Call the men of Judah together to me within three days,  be thou here present.
So Amasa went to call the men of Judah together,  he delayed longer than the set time which he had appointed him.
And David said to Abishai, Now will Sheba the son of Bichri do us more harm than did Absalom. Take thou thy lord's servants,  pursue after him, lest he get him fortified cities,  escape out of our sight.
And there went out after him Joab's men,  the Cherethites and the Pelethites,  all the mighty men. And they went out of Jerusalem, to pursue after Sheba the son of Bichri.
When they were at the great stone which is in Gibeon, Amasa came to meet them. And Joab was girded with his apparel of war that he had put on,  on it was a belt with a sword fastened upon his loins in the sheath of it. And as he went forth it fell out.
And Joab said to Amasa, Is it well with thee, my brother? And Joab took Amasa by the beard with his right hand to kiss him.
But Amasa took no heed to the sword that was in Joab's hand. So he smote him with it in the body,  shed out his bowels to the ground,  struck him not again,  he died. And Joab and Abishai his brother pursued after Sheba the son of Bichri.
And there stood by him one of Joab's young men,  said, He who favors Joab,  he who is for David, let him follow Joab.
And Amasa lay wallowing in his blood in the midst of the highway. And when the man saw that all the people stood still, he carried Amasa out of the highway into the field,  cast a garment over him, when he saw that everyone who came by him stood still.
When he was removed out of the highway, all the people went on after Joab to pursue after Sheba the son of Bichri.
And he went through all the tribes of Israel to Abel,  to Beth-maacah,  all the Berites. And they were gathered together,  also went after him.
And they came and besieged him in Abel of Beth-maacah,  they cast up a mound against the city,  it stood against the rampart. And all the people who were with Joab battered the wall, to throw it down.
Then a wise woman out of the city cried out, Hear, hear. Say, I pray you, to Joab, Come near here, that I may speak with thee.
And he came near to her,  the woman said, Are thou Joab? And he answered, I am. Then she said to him, Hear the words of thy handmaid. And he answered, I do hear.
Then she spoke, saying, They were accustomed to speak in old time, saying, They shall surely ask counsel at Abel,  so they ended the matter.
I am of those who are peaceable and faithful in Israel. Thou seek to destroy a city and a mother in Israel. Why will thou swallow up the inheritance of Jehovah?
And Joab answered and said, Far be it, far be it from me that I should swallow up or destroy.
The matter is not so,  a man of the hill-country of Ephraim, Sheba the son of Bichri by name, has lifted up his hand against the king, even against David. Deliver him only,  I will depart from the city. And the woman said to Joab, Behold, his head shall be thrown to thee over the wall.
Then the woman went to all the people in her wisdom. And they cut off the head of Sheba the son of Bichri,  threw it out to Joab. And he blew the trumpet,  they were dispersed from the city, every man to his tent. And Joab returned to Jerusalem to the king.
Now Joab was over all the army of Israel,  Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over the Cherethites and over the Pelethites,
and Adoram was over the men subject to task work,  Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud was the recorder,
and Sheva was scribe,  Zadok and Abiathar were priests,
and also Ira the Jairite was chief minister to David.
And there was a famine in the days of David three years, year after year; and David sought the face of Jehovah. And Jehovah said, It is for Saul,  for his bloody house, because he put to death the Gibeonites.
And the king called the Gibeonites,  spoke to them (now the Gibeonites were not of the sons of Israel,  of the remnant of the Amorites,  the sons of Israel had sworn to them,  yet Saul sought to kill them in his zeal for the sons of Israel and Judah),
and David said to the Gibeonites, What shall I do for you? And with what shall I make atonement that ye may bless the inheritance of Jehovah?
And the Gibeonites said to him, It is no matter of silver or gold between us and Saul or his house, neither is it for us to put any man to death in Israel. And he said, What ye shall say, that I will do for you.
And they said to the king, The man who consumed us,  who devised against us, that we should be destroyed from remaining in any of the borders of Israel,
let seven men of his sons be delivered to us,  we will hang them up to Jehovah in Gibeah of Saul, the chosen of Jehovah. And the king said, I will give them.
But the king spared Mephibosheth, the son of Jonathan the son of Saul, because of Jehovah's oath that was between them, between David and Jonathan the son of Saul.
But the king took the two sons of Rizpah the daughter of Aiah whom she bore to Saul, Armoni and Mephibosheth,  the five sons of Merab the daughter of Saul whom she bore to Adriel the son of Barzillai the Meholathite.
And he delivered them into the hands of the Gibeonites. And they hanged them in the mountain before Jehovah,  they fell all seven together. And they were put to death in the days of harvest, in the first days, at the beginning of barley harvest.
And Rizpah the daughter of Aiah took sackcloth,  spread it for her upon the rock, from the beginning of harvest until water was poured upon them from heaven. And she neither allowed the birds of the heaven to rest on them by day, nor the beasts of the field by night.
And it was told David what Rizpah the daughter of Aiah, the concubine of Saul, had done.
And David went and took the bones of Saul and the bones of Jonathan his son from the men of Jabesh-gilead, who had stolen them from the street of Beth-shan where the Philistines had hanged them in the day that the Philistines killed Saul in Gilboa,
and he brought up from there the bones of Saul and the bones of Jonathan his son,  they gathered the bones of those who were hanged.
And they buried the bones of Saul and Jonathan his son in the country of Benjamin in Zela, in the sepulcher of Kish his father. And they performed all that the king commanded. And after that God was entreated for the land.
And the Philistines had war again with Israel. And David went down,  his servants with him,  fought against the Philistines. And David grew faint,
and Ishbibenob, who was of the sons of the giant, the weight of whose spear was three hundred shekels of brass in weight, he being girded with a new sword, thought to have slain David.
But Abishai the son of Zeruiah helped him,  smote the Philistine,  killed him. Then the men of David swore to him, saying, Thou shall no more go out with us to battle, that thou not quench the lamp of Israel.
And it came to pass after this, that there was again war with the Philistines at Gob. Then Sibbecai the Hushathite killed Saph, who was of the sons of the giant.
And there was again war with the Philistines at Gob. And Elhanan the son of Jaareoregim the Bethlehemite killed Goliath the Gittite, the staff of whose spear was like a weaver's beam.
And there was again war at Gath, where there was a man of great stature who had on every hand six fingers,  on every foot six toes, twenty-four in number,  he also was born to the giant.
And when he defied Israel, Jonathan the son of Shimei, David's brother, killed him.
These four were born to the giant in Gath,  they fell by the hand of David,  by the hand of his servants.
And David spoke to Jehovah the words of this song in the day that Jehovah delivered him out of the hand of all his enemies,  out of the hand of Saul:
And he said, Jehovah is my rock,  my fortress,  my deliverer, even mine.
God, my rock, in him I will take refuge, my shield,  the horn of my salvation, my high tower,  my refuge, my savior. Thou save me from violence.
I will call upon Jehovah, who is worthy to be praised. So I shall be saved from my enemies.
For the waves of death encompassed me. The floods of ungodliness made me afraid.
The cords of Sheol were round about me. The snares of death came upon me.
In my distress I called upon Jehovah. Yea, I called to my God. And he heard my voice out of his temple,  my cry came into his ears.
Then the earth shook and trembled, the foundations of heaven quaked and were shaken, because he was angry.
There went up a smoke out of his nostrils,  fire out of his mouth devoured. Coals were kindled by it.
He bowed the heavens also,  came down,  thick darkness was under his feet.
And he rode upon a cherub,  flew. Yea, he was seen upon the wings of the wind.
And he made darkness pavilions round about him, gathering of waters, thick clouds of the skies.
At the brightness before him coals of fire were kindled.
Jehovah thundered from heaven,  the Most High uttered his voice.
And he sent out arrows,  scattered them, lightning,  discomfited them.
Then the channels of the sea appeared. The foundations of the world were laid bare by the rebuke of Jehovah, at the blast of the breath of his nostrils.
He sent from on high, he took me. He drew me out of many waters.
He delivered me from my strong enemy, from those who hated me, for they were too mighty for me.
They came upon me in the day of my calamity,  Jehovah was my support.
He brought me forth also into a large place. He delivered me, because he delighted in me.
Jehovah rewarded me according to my righteousness. According to the cleanness of my hands he has rewarded me.
For I have kept the ways of Jehovah,  have not wickedly departed from my God.
For all his ordinances were before me. And as for his statutes, I did not depart from them.
I was also perfect toward him,  I kept myself from my iniquity.
Therefore Jehovah has recompensed me according to my righteousness, according to my cleanness in his eyesight.
With the merciful thou will show thyself merciful. With the perfect man thou will show thyself perfect.
With the pure thou will show thyself pure. And with the perverse thou will show thyself contrary.
And the afflicted people thou will save,  thine eyes are upon the haughty, that thou may bring them down.
For thou are my lamp, O Jehovah. And Jehovah will lighten my darkness.
For by thee I run upon a troop. By my God do I leap over a wall.
As for God, his way is perfect. The word of Jehovah is tried. He is a shield to all those who take refuge in him.
For who is God, except Jehovah? And who is a rock, except our God?
God is my strong fortress,  he guides the perfect in his way.
He makes his feet like hinds' feet,  sets me upon my high places.
He teaches my hands to war, so that my arms bend a bow of brass.
Thou have also given me the shield of thy salvation,  thy gentleness has made me great.
Thou have enlarged my steps under me,  my feet have not slipped.
I have pursued my enemies,  destroyed them, neither did I turn again till they were consumed.
And I have consumed them,  smitten them through, so that they cannot arise. Yea, they are fallen under my feet.
For thou have girded me with strength to the battle. Thou have subdued under me those who rose up against me.
Thou have also made my enemies turn their backs to me, that I might cut off those who hate me.
They looked,  there was none to save; even to Jehovah,  he did not answer them.
Then I beat them small as the dust of the earth. I crushed them as the mire of the streets,  spread them abroad.
Thou have also delivered me from the strivings of my people. Thou have kept me to be the head of the nations. A people whom I have not known shall serve me.
The foreigners shall submit themselves to me. As soon as they hear of me, they shall obey me.
The foreigners shall fade away,  shall come trembling out of their hiding places.
Jehovah lives. And blessed be my rock. And exalted be God, the rock of my salvation,
Even the God who executes vengeance for me,  who brings down peoples under me,
and who brings me forth from my enemies. Yea, thou lift me up above those who rise up against me. Thou deliver me from the violent man.
Therefore I will give thanks to thee, O Jehovah, among gentiles,  will sing praises to thy name.
He gives great deliverance to his king,  shows loving kindness to his anointed, to David and to his seed, for evermore.
Now these are the last words of David. David the son of Jesse says,  the man who was raised on high says, the anointed of the God of Jacob,  the sweet psalmist of Israel:
The Spirit of Jehovah spoke by me,  his word was upon my tongue.
The God of Israel said, The Rock of Israel spoke to me. He who rules over men righteously, who rules in the fear of God,
he shall be as the light of the morning, when the sun rises, a morning without clouds, when the tender grass springs out of the earth, through clear shining after rain.
Truly my house is not so with God. Yet he has made with me an everlasting covenant, ordered in all things,  sure. For it is all my salvation,  all my desire, though he does not make it to grow.
But the worthless shall be as thorns to be thrust away, all of them, because they cannot be taken with the hand.
But the man who touches them must be armed with iron and the staff of a spear,  they shall be utterly burned with fire in their place.
These are the names of the mighty men whom David had: Josheb-basshebeth a Tahchemonite, chief of the captains, the same was Adino the Eznite, against eight hundred slain at one time.
And after him was Eleazar the son of Dodai the son of an Ahohite, one of the three mighty men with David when they defied the Philistines who were there gathered together to battle,  the men of Israel were gone away.
He arose,  smote the Philistines until his hand was weary,  his hand clung to the sword. And Jehovah wrought a great victory that day,  the people returned after him only to take spoil.
And after him was Shammah the son of Agee a Hararite. And the Philistines were gathered together into a troop where was a plot of ground full of lentils,  the people fled from the Philistines.
But he stood in the midst of the plot,  defended it,  killed the Philistines. And Jehovah wrought a great victory.
And three of the thirty chief men went down,  came to David in the harvest time to the cave of Adullam,  the troop of the Philistines was encamped in the valley of Rephaim.
And David was then in the stronghold,  the garrison of the Philistines was then in Bethlehem.
And David longed,  said, Oh that someone would give me water to drink from the well of Bethlehem, which is by the gate!
And the three mighty men broke through the army of the Philistines,  drew water out of the well of Bethlehem that was by the gate,  took it,  brought it to David. But he would not drink of it,  poured it out to Jehovah.
And he said, Be it far from me, O Jehovah, that I should do this, to drink the blood of the men who went in jeopardy of their lives? Therefore he would not drink it. These things the three mighty men did.
And Abishai, the brother of Joab, the son of Zeruiah, was chief of the three. And he lifted up his spear against three hundred and killed them,  had a name among the three.
Was he not most honorable of the three? Therefore he was made their captain. However he did not attain to the first three.
And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, the son of a valiant man of Kabzeel, who had done mighty deeds, he killed the two sons of Ariel of Moab. He also went down and killed a lion in the midst of a pit in time of snow.
And he killed an Egyptian, a good-looking man. And the Egyptian had a spear in his hand,  he went down to him with a staff,  plucked the spear out of the Egyptian's hand,  killed him with his own spear.
These things Benaiah the son of Jehoiada did,  had a name among the three mighty men.
He was more honorable than the thirty,  he did not attain to the first three. And David set him over his guard.
Asahel the brother of Joab was one of the thirty; Elhanan the son of Dodo of Bethlehem,
Shammah the Harodite, Elika the Harodite,
Helez the Paltite, Ira the son of Ikkesh the Tekoite,
Abiezer the Anathothite, Mebunnai the Hushathite,
Zalmon the Ahohite, Maharai the Netophathite,
Heleb the son of Baanah the Netophathite, Ittai the son of Ribai of Gibeah of the sons of Benjamin,
Benaiah a Pirathonite, Hiddai of the brooks of Gaash.
Abialbon the Arbathite, Azmaveth the Barhumite,
Eliahba the Shaalbonite (of the sons of Jashen), Jonathan,
Shammah the Hararite, Ahiam the son of Sharar the Ararite,
Eliphelet the son of Ahasbai, the son of the Maacathite, Eliam the son of Ahithophel the Gilonite,
Hezro the Carmelite, Paarai the Arbite,
Igal the son of Nathan of Zobah, Bani the Gadite,
Zelek the Ammonite, Naharai the Beerothite, armorbearers to Joab the son of Zeruiah,
Ira the Ithrite, Gareb the Ithrite,
Uriah the Hittite: thirty-seven in all.
And again the anger of Jehovah was kindled against Israel,  he moved David against them, saying, Go, number Israel and Judah.
And the king said to Joab the captain of the army, who was with him, Go now to and fro through all the tribes of Israel, from Dan even to Beersheba,  number ye the people, that I may know the sum of the people.
And Joab said to the king, Now Jehovah thy God add to the people, however many they may be, a hundredfold,  may the eyes of my lord the king see it,  why does my lord the king delight in this thing?
Notwithstanding, the king's word prevailed against Joab,  against the captains of the army. And Joab and the captains of the army went out from the presence of the king to number the people of Israel.
And they passed over the Jordan,  encamped in Aroer on the right side of the city that is in the middle of the valley of Gad,  to Jazer.
Then they came to Gilead,  to the land of Tahtim-hodshi. And they came to Dan-jaan,  round about to Sidon,
and came to the stronghold of Tyre,  to all the cities of the Hivites,  of the Canaanites. And they went out to the south of Judah, at Beersheba.
So when they had gone to and fro through all the land, they came to Jerusalem at the end of nine months and twenty days.
And Joab gave the sum of the numbering of the people to the king. And there were in Israel eight hundred thousand valiant men who drew the sword,  the men of Judah were five hundred thousand men.
And David's heart smote him after he had numbered the people. And David said to Jehovah, I have sinned greatly in that which I have done,  now, O Jehovah, put away, I beseech thee, the iniquity of thy servant, for I have done very foolishly.
And when David rose up in the morning, the word of Jehovah came to the prophet Gad, David's seer, saying,
Go and speak to David, Thus says Jehovah, I offer thee three things. Choose thee one of them, that I may do it to thee.
So Gad came to David,  told him,  said to him, Shall seven years of famine come to thee in thy land? Or will thou flee three months before thy foes while they pursue thee? Or shall there be three days' pestilence in thy land? Now decide,  see what answer I shall return to him who sent me.
And David said to Gad, I am in a great strait. Let us fall now into the hand of Jehovah, for his mercies are great,  let me not fall into the hand of man.
So Jehovah sent a pestilence upon Israel from the morning even to the time appointed. And there died of the people from Dan even to Beersheba seventy thousand men.
And when the agent stretched out his hand toward Jerusalem to destroy it, Jehovah relented of the evil,  said to the agent who destroyed the people, It is enough. Now stay thy hand. And the agent of Jehovah was by the threshing-floor of Araunah the Jebusite.
And David spoke to Jehovah when he saw the agent who smote the people,  said, Lo, I have sinned,  I have done perversely,  these sheep, what have they done? Let thy hand, I pray thee, be against me,  against my father's house.
And Gad came that day to David,  said to him, Go up, rear an altar to Jehovah in the threshing-floor of Araunah the Jebusite.
And David went up according to the saying of Gad, as Jehovah commanded.
And Araunah looked forth,  saw the king and his servants coming on toward him. And Araunah went out,  bowed himself before the king with his face to the ground.
And Araunah said, Why has my lord the king come to his servant? And David said, To buy the threshing-floor from thee, to build an altar to Jehovah that the plague may be halted from the people.
And Araunah said to David, Let my lord the king take and offer up what seems good to him. Behold, the oxen for the burnt offering,  the threshing instruments and the yokes of the oxen for the wood.
All this, O king, Araunah gives to the king. And Araunah said to the king, Jehovah thy God accept thee.
And the king said to Araunah, No,  I will truly buy it from thee at a price. Neither will I offer burnt offerings to Jehovah my God which cost me nothing. So David bought the threshing-floor and the oxen for fifty shekels of silver.
And David built there an altar to Jehovah,  offered burnt offerings and peace offerings. So Jehovah was entreated for the land,  the plague was halted from Israel.
I Kings
Kgs. Now king David was old and stricken in years,  they covered him with clothes,  he did not get warm.
Kgs. Therefore his servants said to him, Let there be sought for my lord the king a young virgin. And let her stand before the king,  take care of him. And let her lie in thy bosom, that my lord the king may get warmth.
Kgs. So they sought for a fair damsel throughout all the borders of Israel,  found Abishag the Shunammite,  brought her to the king.
Kgs. And the damsel was very fair. And she took care of the king,  ministered to him,  the king knew her not.
Kgs. Then Adonijah the son of Haggith exalted himself, saying, I will be king. And he prepared chariots for him,  horsemen,  fifty men to run before him.
Kgs. And his father had not displeased him at any time in saying, Why have thou done so? And he was also a very handsome man. And he was born after Absalom.
Kgs. And he conferred with Joab the son of Zeruiah,  with Abiathar the priest. And, following Adonijah, they helped him.
Kgs. But Zadok the priest,  Benaiah the son of Jehoiada,  Nathan the prophet,  Shimei,  Rei,  the mighty men who belonged to David, were not with Adonijah.
Kgs. And Adonijah killed sheep and oxen and fatlings by the stone of Zoheleth, which is beside En-rogel. And he called all his brothers, the king's sons,  all the men of Judah, the king's servants.
Kgs. But he did not call Nathan the prophet,  Benaiah,  the mighty men,  Solomon his brother.
Kgs. Then Nathan spoke to Bathsheba the mother of Solomon, saying, Have thou not heard that Adonijah the son of Haggith reigns,  David our lord does not know it?
Kgs. Now therefore come, let me, I pray thee, give thee counsel, that thou may save thine own life,  the life of thy son Solomon.
Kgs. Go and get thee in to king David,  say to him, Did thou not, my lord, O king, swear to thy handmaid, saying, Assuredly Solomon thy son shall reign after me,  he shall sit upon my throne? Why then does Adonijah reign?
Kgs. Behold, while thou yet talk there with the king, I also will come in after thee,  confirm thy words.
Kgs. And Bathsheba went in to the king into the chamber. And the king was very old,  Abishag the Shunammite was ministering to the king.
Kgs. And Bathsheba bowed,  did obeisance to the king. And the king said, What do thou want?
Kgs. And she said to him, My lord, thou swore by Jehovah thy God to thy handmaid, saying, Assuredly Solomon thy son shall reign after me,  he shall sit upon my throne.
Kgs. And now, behold, Adonijah reigns,  thou, my lord the king, do not know it.
Kgs. And he has slain oxen and fatlings and sheep in abundance,  has called all the sons of the king,  Abiathar the priest,  Joab the captain of the army,  he has not called Solomon thy servant.
Kgs. And thou, my lord the king, the eyes of all Israel are upon thee, that thou should tell them who shall sit on the throne of my lord the king after him.
Kgs. Otherwise it will come to pass, when my lord the king shall sleep with his fathers, that I and my son Solomon shall be considered offenders.
Kgs. And, lo, while she yet talked with the king, Nathan the prophet came in.
Kgs. And they told the king, saying, Behold, Nathan the prophet. And when he came in before the king, he bowed himself before the king with his face to the ground.
Kgs. And Nathan said, My lord, O king, have thou said, Adonijah shall reign after me,  he shall sit upon my throne?
Kgs. For he has gone down this day,  has slain oxen and fatlings and sheep in abundance,  has called all the king's sons,  the captains of the army,  Abiathar the priest. And, behold, they are eating and drinking before him,  say, Live, king Adonijah.
Kgs. But me, even me thy servant,  Zadok the priest,  Benaiah the son of Jehoiada,  thy servant Solomon, he has not called.
Kgs. Is this thing done by my lord the king,  thou have not shown to thy servants who should sit on the throne of my lord the king after him?
Kgs. Then king David answered and said, Call Bathsheba to me. And she came into the king's presence,  stood before the king.
Kgs. And the king swore,  said, As Jehovah lives, who has redeemed my soul out of all adversity,
Kgs. truly as I swore to thee by Jehovah, the God of Israel, saying, Assuredly Solomon thy son shall reign after me,  he shall sit upon my throne in my stead. Surely so I will do this day.
Kgs. Then Bathsheba bowed with her face to the earth,  did obeisance to the king,  said, Let my lord king David live forever.
Kgs. And king David said, Call to me Zadok the priest,  Nathan the prophet,  Benaiah the son of Jehoiada. And they came before the king.
Kgs. And the king said to them, Take with you the servants of your lord,  cause Solomon my son to ride upon my own mule,  bring him down to Gihon.
Kgs. And let Zadok the priest and Nathan the prophet anoint him there king over Israel. And blow ye the trumpet,  say, Live, king Solomon.
Kgs. Then ye shall come up after him,  he shall come and sit upon my throne, for he shall be king in my stead. And I have appointed him to be prince over Israel and over Judah.
Kgs. And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada answered the king,  said, Truly. Jehovah, the God of my lord the king, say so too.
Kgs. As Jehovah has been with my lord the king, even so be he with Solomon,  make his throne greater than the throne of my lord king David.
Kgs. So Zadok the priest,  Nathan the prophet,  Benaiah the son of Jehoiada,  the Cherethites and the Pelethites, went down,  caused Solomon to ride upon king David's mule,  brought him to Gihon.
Kgs. And Zadok the priest took the horn of oil out of the tent,  anointed Solomon. And they blew the trumpet,  all the people said, Live, king Solomon.
Kgs. And all the people came up after him,  the people piped with pipes,  rejoiced with great joy, so that the earth quivered with the sound of them.
Kgs. And Adonijah and all the guests who were with him heard it as they had made an end of eating. And when Joab heard the sound of the trumpet, he said, Why is this noise of the city being in an uproar?
Kgs. While he yet spoke, behold, Jonathan the son of Abiathar the priest came. And Adonijah said, Come in, for thou are a worthy man,  bring good news.
Kgs. And Jonathan answered and said to Adonijah, Truly our lord king David has made Solomon king.
Kgs. And the king has sent with him Zadok the priest,  Nathan the prophet,  Benaiah the son of Jehoiada,  the Cherethites and the Pelethites. And they have caused him to ride upon the king's mule.
Kgs. And Zadok the priest and Nathan the prophet have anointed him king in Gihon. And they have come up from there rejoicing, so that the city rang again. This is the noise that ye have heard.
Kgs. And also Solomon sits on the throne of the kingdom.
Kgs. And moreover the king's servants came to bless our lord king David, saying, Thy God make the name of Solomon better than thy name,  make his throne greater than thy throne. And the king bowed himself upon the bed.
Kgs. And also thus said the king, Blessed be Jehovah, the God of Israel, who has given one of my seed to sit on my throne this day, my eyes even seeing it.
Kgs. And all the guests of Adonijah were afraid,  rose up,  every man went his way.
Kgs. And Adonijah feared because of Solomon. And he arose,  went,  caught hold on the horns of the altar.
Kgs. And it was told Solomon, saying, Behold, Adonijah fears king Solomon, for, lo, he has laid hold on the horns of the altar, saying, Let king Solomon swear to me first that he will not kill his servant with the sword.
Kgs. And Solomon said, If he shall show himself a worthy man, there shall not a hair of him fall to the earth,  if wickedness be found in him, he shall die.
Kgs. So king Solomon sent,  they brought him down from the altar. And he came and did obeisance to king Solomon. And Solomon said to him, Go to thy house.
Kgs. Now the days of David drew near that he should die. And he charged Solomon his son, saying,
Kgs. I am going the way of all the earth. Be thou strong therefore,  show thyself a man,
Kgs. and keep the charge of Jehovah thy God, to walk in his ways, to keep his statutes,  his commandments,  his ordinances,  his testimonies, according to that which is written in the law of Moses, that thou may prosper in all that thou do,  wherever thou turn thyself.
Kgs. That Jehovah may establish his word which he spoke concerning me, saying, If thy sons take heed to their way, to walk before me in truth with all their heart and with all their soul, there shall not fail thee a man on the throne of Israel.
Kgs. Moreover thou also know what Joab the son of Zeruiah did to me, even what he did to the two captains of the armies of Israel, to Abner the son of Ner,  to Amasa the son of Jether, whom he killed,  shed the blood of war in peace,  put the blood of war upon his belt that was about his loins,  in his shoes that were on his feet.
Kgs. Do therefore according to thy wisdom,  do not let his hoar head go down to Sheol in peace.
Kgs. But show kindness to the sons of Barzillai the Gileadite,  let them be of those who eat at thy table, for so they came to me when I fled from Absalom thy brother.
Kgs. And, behold, there is with thee Shimei the son of Gera, the Benjamite, of Bahurim, who cursed me with a grievous curse in the day when I went to Mahanaim. But he came down to meet me at the Jordan,  I swore to him by Jehovah, saying, I will not put thee to death with the sword.
Kgs. Now therefore do not hold him guiltless, for thou are a wise man,  thou will know what thou ought to do to him,  thou shall bring his hoar head down to Sheol with blood.
Kgs. And David slept with his fathers,  was buried in the city of David.
Kgs. And the days that David reigned over Israel were forty years. He reigned seven years in Hebron,  he reigned thirty-three years in Jerusalem.
Kgs. And Solomon sat upon the throne of David his father,  his kingdom was established greatly.
Kgs. Then Adonijah the son of Haggith came to Bathsheba the mother of Solomon. And she said, Do thou come peaceably? And he said, Peaceably.
Kgs. He said moreover, I have something to say to thee. And she said, Say on.
Kgs. And he said, Thou know that the kingdom was mine,  that all Israel set their faces on me, that I should reign. However the kingdom is turned about,  has become my brother's, for it was his from Jehovah.
Kgs. And now I ask one petition of thee; do not deny me. And she said to him, Say on.
Kgs. And he said, Speak, I pray thee, to Solomon the king (for he will not say no thee), that he give me Abishag the Shunammite to wife.
Kgs. And Bathsheba said, Well, I will speak for thee to the king.
Kgs. Bathsheba therefore went to king Solomon to speak to him for Adonijah. And the king rose up to meet her,  bowed himself to her,  sat down on his throne,  caused a throne to be set for the king's mother. And she sat on his right hand.
Kgs. Then she said, I ask one small petition of thee; do not deny me. And the king said to her, Ask on, my mother, for I will not deny thee.
Kgs. And she said, Let Abishag the Shunammite be given to Adonijah thy brother to wife.
Kgs. And king Solomon answered and said to his mother, And why do thou ask Abishag the Shunammite for Adonijah? Ask for him the kingdom also, for he is my elder brother, even for him,  for Abiathar the priest,  for Joab the son of Zeruiah.
Kgs. Then king Solomon swore by Jehovah, saying, God do so to me,  more also, if Adonijah has not spoken this word against his own life.
Kgs. Now therefore as Jehovah lives, who has established me,  set me on the throne of David my father,  who has made me a house as he promised, surely Adonijah shall be put to death this day.
Kgs. And king Solomon sent by Benaiah the son of Jehoiada,  he fell upon him so that he died.
Kgs. And the king said to Abiathar the priest, Get thee to Anathoth, to thine own fields, for thou are worthy of death. But I will not at this time put thee to death, because thou bore the ark of the lord Jehovah before David my father,  because thou were afflicted in all wherein my father was afflicted.
Kgs. So Solomon thrust out Abiathar from being priest to Jehovah, that he might fulfill the word of Jehovah, which he spoke concerning the house of Eli in Shiloh.
Kgs. And the news came to Joab, for Joab had turned after Adonijah, though he did not turn after Absalom. And Joab fled to the tent of Jehovah,  caught hold on the horns of the altar.
Kgs. And it was told king Solomon, Joab has fled to the tent of Jehovah, , behold, he is by the altar. Then Solomon sent Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, saying, Go, fall upon him.
Kgs. And Benaiah came to the tent of Jehovah,  said to him, Thus says the king, Come forth. And he said, No,  I will die here. And Benaiah brought the king word again, saying, Thus said Joab,  thus he answered me.
Kgs. And the king said to him, Do as he has said,  fall upon him,  bury him, that thou may take away the blood, which Joab shed without cause, from me and from my father's house.
Kgs. And Jehovah will return his blood upon his own head, because he fell upon two men more righteous and better than he,  killed them with the sword,  my father David did not know it, namely, Abner the son of Ner, captain of the army of Israel,  Amasa the son of Jether, captain of the army of Judah.
Kgs. So shall their blood return upon the head of Joab,  upon the head of his seed forever. But to David,  to his seed,  to his house,  to his throne, there shall be peace forever from Jehovah.
Kgs. Then Benaiah the son of Jehoiada went up,  fell upon him,  killed him. And he was buried in his own house in the wilderness.
Kgs. And the king put Benaiah the son of Jehoiada in his room over the army. And the king put Zadok the priest in the place of Abiathar.
Kgs. And the king sent and called for Shimei,  said to him, Build for thee a house in Jerusalem,  dwell there,  go not forth from there anywhere.
Kgs. For on the day thou go out,  pass over the brook Kidron, know thou for certain that thou shall surely die; thy blood shall be upon thine own head.
Kgs. And Shimei said to the king, The saying is good. As my lord the king has said, so will thy servant do. And Shimei dwelt in Jerusalem many days.
Kgs. And it came to pass at the end of three years, that two of the servants of Shimei ran away to Achish, son of Maacah, king of Gath. And they told Shimei, saying, Behold, thy servants are in Gath.
Kgs. And Shimei arose,  saddled his donkey,  went to Gath to Achish to seek his servants. And Shimei went,  brought his servants from Gath.
Kgs. And it was told Solomon that Shimei had gone from Jerusalem to Gath,  was come again.
Kgs. And the king sent and called for Shimei,  said to him, Did I not adjure thee by Jehovah,  protest to thee, saying, Know for certain, that on the day thou go out,  walk abroad anywhere, thou shall surely die? And thou said to me, The saying that I have heard is good.
Kgs. Why then have thou not kept the oath of Jehovah,  the commandment that I have charged thee with?
Kgs. The king said moreover to Shimei, Thou know all the iniquity which thy heart is privy to, what thou did to David my father. Therefore Jehovah shall return thy iniquity upon thine own head.
Kgs. But king Solomon shall be blessed,  the throne of David shall be established before Jehovah forever.
Kgs. So the king commanded Benaiah the son of Jehoiada. And he went out,  fell upon him so that he died. And the kingdom was established in the hand of Solomon.
Kgs. And Solomon made affinity with Pharaoh king of Egypt,  took Pharaoh's daughter,  brought her into the city of David until he had made an end of building his own house,  the house of Jehovah,  the wall of Jerusalem round about.
Kgs. Only the people sacrificed in the high places, because there was no house built for the name of Jehovah until those days.
Kgs. And Solomon loved Jehovah, walking in the statutes of David his father. Only he sacrificed and burnt incense in the high places.
Kgs. And the king went to Gibeon to sacrifice there, for that was the great high place. Solomon offered a thousand burnt offerings upon that altar.
Kgs. In Gibeon Jehovah appeared to Solomon in a dream by night,  God said, Ask what I shall give thee.
Kgs. And Solomon said, Thou have shown to thy servant David my father great loving kindness, according as he walked before thee in truth,  in righteousness,  in uprightness of heart with thee. And thou have kept for him this great loving kindness, that thou have given him a son to sit on his throne as it is this day.
Kgs. And now, O Jehovah my God, thou have made thy servant king instead of David my father. And I am but a little child; I know not how to go out or come in.
Kgs. And thy servant is in the midst of thy people which thou have chosen, a great people that cannot be numbered nor counted for multitude.
Kgs. Give thy servant therefore an understanding heart to judge thy people, that I may discern between good and evil, for who is able to judge this thy great people?
Kgs. And the speech pleased the Lord, that Solomon had asked this thing.
Kgs. And God said to him, Because thou have asked this thing,  have not asked for thyself long life, neither have asked riches for thyself, nor have asked the life of thine enemies,  have asked for thyself understanding to discern justice,
Kgs. behold, I have done according to thy word. Lo, I have given thee a wise and an understanding heart, so that there has been none like thee before thee, neither after thee shall any arise like thee.
Kgs. And I have also given thee that which thou have not asked, both riches and honor, so that there shall not be any among the kings like thee all thy days.
Kgs. And if thou will walk in my ways, to keep my statutes and my commandments, as thy father David walked, then I will lengthen thy days.
Kgs. And Solomon awoke, , behold, it was a dream. And he came to Jerusalem,  stood before the ark of the covenant of Jehovah,  offered up burnt offerings,  offered peace offerings,  made a feast to all his servants.
Kgs. Then two women who were harlots came to the king,  stood before him.
Kgs. And the one woman said, Oh, my lord, I and this woman dwell in one house. And I was delivered of a child with her in the house.
Kgs. And it came to pass the third day after I was delivered, that this woman was delivered also. And we were together; there was no stranger with us in the house, except we two in the house.
Kgs. And this woman's child died in the night, because she lay upon it.
Kgs. And she arose at midnight,  took my son from beside me while thy handmaid slept,  laid it in her bosom,  laid her dead child in my bosom.
Kgs. And when I rose in the morning to give my child suck, behold, it was dead. But when I had looked at it in the morning, behold, it was not my son whom I bore.
Kgs. And the other woman said, No,  the living is my son,  the dead is thy son. And the other woman said, No,  the dead is thy son,  the living is my son. Thus they spoke before the king.
Kgs. Then the king said, The one says, This is my son that lives,  thy son is the dead. And the other says, No,  thy son is the dead,  my son is the living.
Kgs. And the king said, Fetch me a sword. And they brought a sword before the king.
Kgs. And the king said, Divide the living child in two,  give half to the one,  half to the other.
Kgs. Then the woman whose the living child was spoke to the king, for her heart yearned over her son,  she said, Oh, my lord, give her the living child,  by no means kill it. But the other said, It shall be neither mine nor thine. Divide it.
Kgs. Then the king answered and said, Give her the living child,  by no means kill it; she is the mother of it.
Kgs. And all Israel heard of the judgment which the king had judged. And they feared the king, for they saw that the wisdom of God was in him, to do justice.
Kgs. And king Solomon was king over all Israel.
Kgs. And these were the rulers whom he had: Azariah the son of Zadok, the priest;
Kgs. Elihoreph and Ahijah, the sons of Shisha, scribes; Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud, the recorder;
Kgs. and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over the army; and Zadok and Abiathar were priests;
Kgs. and Azariah the son of Nathan was over the officers; and Zabud the son of Nathan was chief minister,  the king's friend;
Kgs. and Ahishar was over the household; and Adoniram the son of Abda was over the men subject to task work.
Kgs. And Solomon had twelve officers over all Israel who provided provisions for the king and his household. Each man had to make provision for a month in the year.
Kgs. And these are their names: Ben-hur, in the hill-country of Ephraim;
Kgs. Ben-deker, in Makaz,  in Shaalbim,  Beth-shemesh,  Elon-beth-hanan;
Kgs. Ben-hesed, in Arubboth (to him pertained Socoh,  all the land of Hepher);
Kgs. Ben-abinadab, in all the height of Dor (he had Taphath the daughter of Solomon to wife);
Kgs. Baana the son of Ahilud, in Taanach and Megiddo,  all Beth-shean which is beside Zarethan, beneath Jezreel, from Beth-shean to Abel-meholah, as far as beyond Jokmeam;
Kgs. Ben-geber, in Ramoth-gilead (to him pertained the towns of Jair the son of Manasseh, which are in Gilead; even to him pertained the region of Argob, which is in Bashan, sixty great cities with walls and brazen bars);
Kgs. Ahinadab the son of Iddo, in Mahanaim;
Kgs. Ahimaaz, in Naphtali (he also took Basemath the daughter of Solomon to wife);
Kgs. Baana the son of Hushai, in Asher and Bealoth;
Kgs. Jehoshaphat the son of Paruah, in Issachar;
Kgs. Shimei the son of Ela, in Benjamin;
Kgs. Geber the son of Uri, in the land of Gilead, the country of Sihon king of the Amorites and of Og king of Bashan,  he was the only officer who was in the land.
Kgs. Judah and Israel were as many as the sand which is by the sea in multitude, eating and drinking and making merry.
Kgs. And Solomon ruled over all the kingdoms from the River to the land of the Philistines,  to the border of Egypt. They brought tribute,  served Solomon all the days of his life.
Kgs. And Solomon's provision for one day was thirty measures of fine flour,  sixty measures of meal,
Kgs. ten fat oxen,  twenty oxen out of the pastures,  a hundred sheep, besides harts,  gazelles,  roebucks,  fatted fowl.
Kgs. For he had dominion over all the region on this side the River, from Tiphsah even to Gaza, over all the kings on this side of the River. And he had peace on all sides round about him.
Kgs. And Judah and Israel dwelt safely, every man under his vine and under his fig tree, from Dan even to Beersheba, all the days of Solomon.
Kgs. And Solomon had forty thousand stalls of horses for his chariots,  twelve thousand horsemen.
Kgs. And those officers provided provisions for king Solomon,  for all who came to king Solomon's table, every man in his month; they let nothing be lacking.
Kgs. Barley also and straw for the horses and swift steeds they brought to the place where the officers were, every man according to his charge.
Kgs. And God gave Solomon exceedingly much wisdom and understanding,  largeness of heart, even as the sand that is on the sea-shore.
Kgs. And Solomon's wisdom excelled the wisdom of all the sons of the east,  all the wisdom of Egypt.
Kgs. For he was wiser than all men: than Ethan the Ezrahite,  Heman,  Calcol,  Darda, the sons of Mahol. And his fame was in all the nations round about.
Kgs. And he spoke three thousand proverbs,  his songs were a thousand and five.
Kgs. And he spoke of trees, from the cedar that is in Lebanon even to the hyssop that springs out of the wall. He spoke also of beasts,  of birds,  of creeping things,  of fishes.
Kgs. And there came of all peoples to hear the wisdom of Solomon, from all kings of the earth who had heard of his wisdom.
Kgs. And Hiram king of Tyre sent his servants to Solomon, for he had heard that they had anointed him king in the place of his father, for Hiram was ever a devotee of David.
Kgs. And Solomon sent to Hiram, saying,
Kgs. Thou know how that David my father could not build a house for the name of Jehovah his God for the wars which were about him on every side, until Jehovah put them under the soles of his feet.
Kgs. But now Jehovah my God has given me rest on every side; there is neither adversary, nor evil occurrence.
Kgs. And, behold, I purpose to build a house for the name of Jehovah my God, as Jehovah spoke to David my father, saying, Thy son, whom I will set upon thy throne in thy place, he shall build the house for my name.
Kgs. Now therefore command thou that they cut for me cedar trees out of Lebanon. And my servants shall be with thy servants. And I will give thee wages for thy servants according to all that thou shall say, for thou know that there is not among us any that knows how to cut timber like the Sidonians.
Kgs. And it came to pass, when Hiram heard the words of Solomon, that he rejoiced greatly,  said, Blessed be Jehovah this day, who has given to David a wise son over this great people.
Kgs. And Hiram sent to Solomon, saying, I have heard that which thou have sent to me. I will do all thy desire concerning timber of cedar,  concerning timber of fir.
Kgs. My servants shall bring them down from Lebanon to the sea. And I will make them into rafts to go by sea to the place that thou shall appoint me,  will cause them to be broken up there,  thou shall receive them. And thou shall accomplish my desire in giving food for my household.
Kgs. So Hiram gave Solomon timber of cedar and timber of fir according to all his desire.
Kgs. And Solomon gave Hiram twenty thousand measures of wheat for food to his household,  twenty measures of pure oil; thus Solomon gave to Hiram year by year.
Kgs. And Jehovah gave Solomon wisdom, as he promised him. And there was peace between Hiram and Solomon,  the two made a league together.
Kgs. And king Solomon raised a conscription out of all Israel,  the conscription was thirty thousand men.
Kgs. And he sent them to Lebanon, ten thousand a month by courses. They were in Lebanon a month,  at home two months. And Adoniram was over the men subject to task work.
Kgs. And Solomon had seventy thousand who bore burdens,  eighty thousand who were hewers in the mountains,
Kgs. besides Solomon's chief officers who were over the work: three thousand and three hundred who bore rule over the people that labored in the work.
Kgs. And the king commanded,  they hewed out great stones, costly stones, to lay the foundation of the house with shaped stone.
Kgs. And Solomon's builders and Hiram's builders and the Gebalites fashioned them,  prepared the timber and the stones to build the house.
Kgs. And it came to pass in the four hundred and eightieth year after the sons of Israel came out of the land of Egypt, in the fourth year of Solomon's reign over Israel, in the month Ziv, which is the second month, that he began to build the house of Jehovah.
Kgs. And the house which king Solomon built for Jehovah, the length of it was sixty cubits,  the breadth of it twenty,  the height of it thirty cubits,
Kgs. and the porch in front of the temple of the house, twenty cubits was the length of it, according to the breadth of the house,  ten cubits was the breadth of it in front of the house.
Kgs. And he made windows of fixed lattice-work for the house.
Kgs. And against the wall of the house he built stories round about, against the walls of the house round about, both of the temple and of the oracle. And he made side-chambers round about.
Kgs. The lowest story was five cubits broad,  the middle was six cubits broad,  the third was seven cubits broad, for on the outside he made offsets in the wall of the house round about, that the beams should not be fastened in the walls of the house.
Kgs. And the house, when it was being built, was built of stone made ready at the quarry. And there was neither hammer nor axe nor any tool of iron heard in the house, while it was being built.
Kgs. The door for the middle side-chambers was in the right side of the house. And they went up by winding stairs into the middle story,  out of the middle into the third.
Kgs. So he built the house,  finished it. And he covered the house with beams and planks of cedar.
Kgs. And he built the stories against all the house, each five cubits high: and they rested on the house with timber of cedar.
Kgs. And the word of Jehovah came to Solomon, saying,
Kgs. Concerning this house that thou are building, if thou will walk in my statutes,  execute my ordinances,  keep all my commandments to walk in them, then I will establish my word with thee, which I spoke to David thy father.
Kgs. And I will dwell among the sons of Israel,  will not forsake my people Israel.
Kgs. So Solomon built the house,  finished it.
Kgs. And he built the walls of the house inside with boards of cedar. From the floor of the house to the walls of the ceiling, he covered them on the inside with wood. And he covered the floor of the house with boards of fir.
Kgs. And he built twenty cubits on the hinder part of the house with boards of cedar from the floor to the walls of the ceiling. He built them for it inside, for an oracle, even for the most holy place.
Kgs. And the house, that is, the temple in front of the oracle, was forty cubits long.
Kgs. And there was cedar on the house inside, carved with knops and open flowers. All was cedar; there was no stone seen.
Kgs. And he prepared an oracle in the midst of the house inside, to set there the ark of the covenant of Jehovah.
Kgs. And inside the oracle was a space of twenty cubits in length,  twenty cubits in breadth,  twenty cubits in the height of it. And he overlaid it with pure gold. And he covered the altar with cedar.
Kgs. So Solomon overlaid the house inside with pure gold. And he drew chains of gold across before the oracle,  he overlaid it with gold.
Kgs. And the whole house he overlaid with gold until all the house was finished. Also the whole altar that belonged to the oracle he overlaid with gold.
Kgs. And in the oracle he made two cherubim of olive-wood, each ten cubits high.
Kgs. And five cubits was the one wing of the cherub,  five cubits the other wing of the cherub. From the outermost part of the one wing to the outermost part of the other were ten cubits.
Kgs. And the other cherub was ten cubits; both of the cherubim were of one measure and one form.
Kgs. The height of the one cherub was ten cubits,  so it was of the other cherub.
Kgs. And he set the cherubim inside the inner house. And the wings of the cherubim were stretched forth, so that the wing of the one touched the one wall,  the wing of the other cherub touched the other wall. And their wings touched each another in the middle of the house.
Kgs. And he overlaid the cherubim with gold.
Kgs. And he carved all the walls of the house round about with carved figures of cherubim and palm trees and open flowers, inside and outside.
Kgs. And the floor of the house he overlaid with gold, inside and outside.
Kgs. And for the entrance of the oracle he made doors of olive-wood. The lintel and door-posts were a fifth part of the wall.
Kgs. So he made two doors of olive-wood. And he carved upon them carvings of cherubim and palm trees and open flowers,  overlaid them with gold. And he spread the gold upon the cherubim,  upon the palm trees.
Kgs. So he also made for the entrance of the temple door-posts of olive-wood out of a fourth part of the wall,
Kgs. and two doors of fir-wood. The two leaves of the one door were folding,  the two leaves of the other door were folding.
Kgs. And he carved thereon cherubim and palm trees and open flowers. And he overlaid them with gold fitted upon the graven work.
Kgs. And he built the inner court with three courses of hewn stone,  a course of cedar beams.
Kgs. In the fourth year the foundation of the house of Jehovah was laid, in the month Ziv.
Kgs. And in the eleventh year, in the month Bul, which is the eighth month, the house was finished throughout all the parts of it,  according to all the fashion of it. So he was seven years in building it.
Kgs. And Solomon was thirteen years building his own house,  he finished all his house.
Kgs. For he built the house of the forest of Lebanon. The length of it was a hundred cubits,  the breadth of it fifty cubits,  the height of it thirty cubits, upon four rows of cedar pillars, with cedar beams upon the pillars.
Kgs. And it was covered with cedar above over the forty-five beams that were upon the pillars, fifteen in a row.
Kgs. And there were beams in three rows,  window was opposite window in three ranks.
Kgs. And all the doors and posts were made square with beams,  window was opposite window in three ranks.
Kgs. And he made the porch of pillars. The length of it was fifty cubits,  the breadth of it thirty cubits,  a porch in front of them,  pillars and a threshold in front of them.
Kgs. And he made the porch of the throne where he was to judge, even the porch of judgment. And it was covered with cedar from floor to floor.
Kgs. And his house where he was to dwell, the other court within the porch was of the like work. He also made a house for Pharaoh's daughter (whom Solomon had taken to wife), like this porch.
Kgs. All these were of costly stones, even of hewn stone, according to measure, sawed with saws, inside and outside, even from the foundation to the coping,  so on the outside to the great court.
Kgs. And the foundation was of costly stones, even great stones, stones of ten cubits,  stones of eight cubits.
Kgs. And above were costly stones, even hewn stone, according to measure,  cedar-wood.
Kgs. And the great court round about had three courses of hewn stone,  a course of cedar beams, like the inner court of the house of Jehovah,  the porch of the house.
Kgs. And king Solomon sent and fetched Hiram out of Tyre.
Kgs. He was the son of a widow of the tribe of Naphtali,  his father was a man of Tyre, a workman in brass. And he was filled with wisdom and understanding and skill, to work all works in brass. And he came to king Solomon,  wrought all his work.
Kgs. For he fashioned the two pillars of brass, eighteen cubits high apiece. And a line of twelve cubits encompassed each of them around.
Kgs. And he made two capitals of molten brass to set upon the tops of the pillars. The height of the one capital was five cubits,  the height of the other capital was five cubits.
Kgs. There were nets of checker-work,  wreaths of chain-work, for the capitals which were upon the top of the pillars; seven for the one capital,  seven for the other capital.
Kgs. So he made the pillars. And there were two rows round about upon the one network to cover the capitals that were upon the top of the pillars. And so he did for the other capital.
Kgs. And the capitals that were upon the top of the pillars in the porch were of lily-work, four cubits.
Kgs. And there were capitals also above upon the two pillars, close by the protuberance which was beside the network. And the pomegranates were two hundred, in rows round about upon the other capital.
Kgs. And he set up the pillars at the porch of the temple. And he set up the right pillar,  called the name of it Jachin,  he set up the left pillar,  called the name of it Boaz.
Kgs. And upon the top of the pillars was lily-work: so was the work of the pillars finished.
Kgs. And he made the molten sea of ten cubits from brim to brim, round in compass,  the height of it was five cubits. And a line of thirty cubits encompassed it round about.
Kgs. And under the brim of it round about there were knops which encompassed it, for ten cubits, encompassing the sea round about. The knops were in two rows, cast when it was cast.
Kgs. It stood upon twelve oxen, three looking toward the north,  three looking toward the west,  three looking toward the south,  three looking toward the east. And the sea was set upon them above,  all their hinder parts were inward.
Kgs. And it was a handbreadth thick. And the brim of it was wrought like the brim of a cup, like the flower of a lily. It held two thousand baths.
Kgs. And he made the ten bases of brass; four cubits was the length of one base,  four cubits the breadth of it,  three cubits the height of it.
Kgs. And the work of the bases was on this manner: They had panels,  there were panels between the ledges.
Kgs. And on the panels that were between the ledges were lions, oxen,  cherubim. And upon the ledges there was a pedestal above. And beneath the lions and oxen were wreaths of hanging work.
Kgs. And every base had four brazen wheels,  axles of brass. And the four corners of it had supports. Beneath the laver were the molten supports with wreaths at the side of each.
Kgs. And the mouth of it within the capital and above was a cubit. And the mouth of it was round after the work of a pedestal, a cubit and a half. And also upon the mouth of it were engravings. And their panels were foursquare, not round.
Kgs. And the four wheels were underneath the panels. And the axletrees of the wheels were in the base. And the height of a wheel was a cubit and half a cubit.
Kgs. And the work of the wheels was like the work of a chariot wheel. Their axletrees,  their felloes,  their spokes,  their naves, were all molten.
Kgs. And there were four supports at the four corners of each base. The supports of it were of the base itself.
Kgs. And in the top of the base there was a round band half a cubit high. And on the top of the base the ledges of it and the panels of it were of the same.
Kgs. And on the plates of the ledges of it,  on the panels of it, he engraved cherubim, lions,  palm trees, according to the space of each, with wreaths round about.
Kgs. After this manner he made the ten bases: all of them had one casting, one measure,  one form.
Kgs. And he made ten basins of brass. One basin contained forty baths. And every basin was four cubits. And upon every one of the ten bases one basin.
Kgs. And he set the bases, five on the right side of the house,  five on the left side of the house. And he set the sea on the right side of the house eastward, toward the south.
Kgs. And Hiram made the basins,  the shovels,  the bowls. So Hiram made an end of doing all the work that he wrought for king Solomon in the house of Jehovah:
Kgs. the two pillars,  the two bowls of the capitals that were on the top of the pillars,  the two networks to cover the two bowls of the capitals that were on the top of the pillars,
Kgs. and the four hundred pomegranates for the two networks, two rows of pomegranates for each network, to cover the two bowls of the capitals that were upon the pillars,
Kgs. and the ten bases,  the ten basins on the bases,
Kgs. and the one sea,  the twelve oxen under the sea,
Kgs. and the pots,  the shovels,  the bowls. And all these vessels, which Hiram made for king Solomon in the house of Jehovah were of burnished brass.
Kgs. The king cast them in the plain of the Jordan, in the clay ground between Succoth and Zarethan.
Kgs. And Solomon left all the vessels unweighed because they were very many; the weight of the brass could not be found out.
Kgs. And Solomon made all the vessels that were in the house of Jehovah: the golden altar,  the table whereupon the showbread was, of gold,
Kgs. and the lampstands, five on the right side,  five on the left, before the oracle, of pure gold,  the flowers,  the lamps,  the tongs, of gold,
Kgs. and the cups,  the snuffers,  the basins,  the spoons,  the firepans, of pure gold,  the hinges, both for the doors of the inner house, the most holy place,  for the doors of the house, namely, of the temple, of gold.
Kgs. Thus all the work that king Solomon wrought in the house of Jehovah was finished. And Solomon brought in the things which David his father had dedicated-the silver,  the gold,  the vessels-and put them in the treasuries of the house of Jehovah.
Kgs. Then Solomon assembled the elders of Israel,  all the heads of the tribes, the princes of the fathers of the sons of Israel, to king Solomon in Jerusalem, to bring up the ark of the covenant of Jehovah out of the city of David, which is Zion.
Kgs. And all the men of Israel assembled themselves to king Solomon at the feast, in the month Ethanim, which is the seventh month.
Kgs. And all the elders of Israel came,  the priests took up the ark.
Kgs. And they brought up the ark of Jehovah,  the tent of meeting,  all the holy vessels that were in the tent; even these the priests and the Levites brought up.
Kgs. And king Solomon and all the congregation of Israel, that were assembled to him, were with him before the ark, sacrificing sheep and oxen that could not be counted nor numbered for multitude.
Kgs. And the priests brought in the ark of the covenant of Jehovah to its place, into the oracle of the house, to the most holy place, even under the wings of the cherubim.
Kgs. For the cherubim spread forth their wings over the place of the ark,  the cherubim covered the ark and the staves of it above.
Kgs. And the staves were so long that the ends of the staves were seen from the holy place before the oracle. But they were not seen outside. And there they are to this day.
Kgs. There was nothing in the ark except the two tablets of stone which Moses put there at Horeb when Jehovah made a covenant with the sons of Israel, when they came out of the land of Egypt.
Kgs. And it came to pass, when the priests came out of the holy place, that the cloud filled the house of Jehovah,
Kgs. so that the priests could not stand to minister by reason of the cloud, for the glory of Jehovah filled the house of Jehovah.
Kgs. Then Solomon spoke, Jehovah has said that he would dwell in the thick darkness.
Kgs. I have surely built thee a house of habitation, a place for thee to dwell in forever.
Kgs. And the king turned his face around,  blessed all the assembly of Israel. And all the assembly of Israel stood.
Kgs. And he said, Blessed be Jehovah, the God of Israel, who spoke with his mouth to David my father,  has with his hand fulfilled it, saying,
Kgs. Since the day that I brought forth my people Israel out of Egypt, I chose no city out of all the tribes of Israel to build a house, that my name might be there,  I chose David to be over my people Israel.
Kgs. Now it was in the heart of David my father to build a house for the name of Jehovah, the God of Israel.
Kgs. But Jehovah said to David my father, Whereas it was in thy heart to build a house for my name, thou did well that it was in thy heart.
Kgs. Nevertheless thou shall not build the house,  thy son that shall come forth out of thy loins, he shall build the house for my name.
Kgs. And Jehovah has established his word that he spoke, for I have risen up in the place of David my father,  sit on the throne of Israel, as Jehovah promised,  have built the house for the name of Jehovah, the God of Israel.
Kgs. And there I have set a place for the ark, in which is the covenant of Jehovah, which he made with our fathers when he brought them out of the land of Egypt.
Kgs. And Solomon stood before the altar of Jehovah in the presence of all the assembly of Israel,  spread forth his hands toward heaven.
Kgs. And he said, O Jehovah, the God of Israel, there is no God like thee, in heaven above, or on earth beneath, who keeps covenant and loving kindness with thy servants, who walk before thee with all their heart,
Kgs. who have kept with thy servant David my father that which thou did promise him. Yea, thou spoke with thy mouth,  have fulfilled it with thy hand, as it is this day.
Kgs. Now therefore, O Jehovah, the God of Israel, keep with thy servant David my father that which thou have promised him, saying, There shall not fail thee a man in my sight to sit on the throne of Israel, if only thy sons take heed to their way, to walk before me as thou have walked before me.
Kgs. Now therefore, O God of Israel, let thy word, I pray thee, be verified, which thou spoke to thy servant David my father.
Kgs. But will God indeed dwell on the earth? Behold, heaven and the heaven of heavens cannot contain thee. How much less this house that I have built!
Kgs. Yet have thou respect to the prayer of thy servant,  to his supplication, O Jehovah my God, to hearken to the cry and to the prayer which thy servant prays before thee this day,
Kgs. that thine eyes may be open toward this house night and day, even toward the place whereof thou have said, My name shall be there, to hearken to the prayer which thy servant shall pray toward this place.
Kgs. And hearken thou to the supplication of thy servant,  of thy people Israel, when they shall pray toward this place. Yea, hear thou in heaven thy dwelling-place,  when thou hear, forgive.
Kgs. If a man sins against his neighbor,  an oath be laid upon him to cause him to swear,  he comes and swears before thine altar in this house,
Kgs. then hear thou in heaven,  do,  judge thy servants, condemning the wicked, to bring his way upon his own head,  justifying the righteous, to give him according to his righteousness.
Kgs. When thy people Israel are smitten down before the enemy because they have sinned against thee, if they turn again to thee,  confess thy name,  pray and make supplication to thee in this house,
Kgs. then hear thou in heaven,  forgive the sin of thy people Israel,  bring them again to the land which thou gave to their fathers.
Kgs. When heaven is shut up,  there is no rain because they have sinned against thee, if they pray toward this place,  confess thy name,  turn from their sin when thou afflict them,
Kgs. then hear thou in heaven,  forgive the sin of thy servants,  of thy people Israel, when thou teach them the good way wherein they should walk,  send rain upon thy land, which thou have given to thy people for an inheritance.
Kgs. If there be famine in the land, if there be pestilence, if there be blight, mildew, locust or caterpillar, if their enemy besiege them in the land of their cities, whatever plague, whatever sickness there be,
Kgs. whatever prayer and supplication be made by any man, or by all thy people Israel, who shall know every man the plague of his own heart,  spread forth his hands toward this house,
Kgs. then hear thou in heaven thy dwelling-place,  forgive,  do,  render to every man according to all his ways, whose heart thou know (for thou, even thou only, know the hearts of all the sons of men),
Kgs. that they may fear thee all the days that they live in the land which thou gave to our fathers.
Kgs. Moreover concerning the foreigner who is not of thy people Israel, when he shall come out of a far country for thy name's sake
Kgs. (for they shall hear of thy great name,  of thy mighty hand,  of thine outstretched arm), when he shall come and pray toward this house,
Kgs. hear thou in heaven thy dwelling-place,  do according to all that the foreigner calls to thee for, that all the peoples of the earth may know thy name, to fear thee, as does thy people Israel,  that they may know that this house which I have built is called by thy name.
Kgs. If thy people go out to battle against their enemy, by whatever way thou shall send them,  they pray to Jehovah toward the city which thou have chosen,  toward the house which I have built for thy name,
Kgs. then hear thou in heaven their prayer and their supplication,  maintain their cause.
Kgs. If they sin against thee (for there is no man that sins not),  thou be angry with them,  deliver them to the enemy, so that they carry them away captive to the land of the enemy, afar off or near,
Kgs. yet if they shall rethink themselves in the land where they are carried captive,  turn again,  make supplication to thee in the land of those who carried them captive, saying, We have sinned,  have done perversely, we have dealt wickedly,
Kgs. if they return to thee with all their heart and with all their soul in the land of their enemies who carried them captive,  pray to thee toward their land, which thou gave to their fathers, the city which thou have chosen,  the house which I have built for thy name,
Kgs. then hear thou their prayer and their supplication in heaven thy dwelling-place,  maintain their case,
Kgs. and forgive thy people who have sinned against thee,  all their transgressions by which they have transgressed against thee,  give them compassion before those who carried them captive, that they may have compassion on them
Kgs. (for they are thy people,  thine inheritance, which thou brought forth out of Egypt, from the midst of the furnace of iron);
Kgs. that thine eyes may be open to the supplication of thy servant,  to the supplication of thy people Israel, to hearken to them whenever they cry to thee.
Kgs. For thou separated them from among all the peoples of the earth, to be thine inheritance, as thou spoke by Moses thy servant when thou brought our fathers out of Egypt, O lord Jehovah.
Kgs. And it was so, that, when Solomon had made an end of praying all this prayer and supplication to Jehovah, he arose from before the altar of Jehovah, from kneeling on his knees with his hands spread forth toward heaven.
Kgs. And he stood,  blessed all the assembly of Israel with a loud voice, saying,
Kgs. Blessed be Jehovah, who has given rest to his people Israel according to all that he promised. There has not failed one word of all his good promise, which he promised by Moses his servant.
Kgs. Jehovah our God be with us as he was with our fathers. Let him not leave us, nor forsake us,
Kgs. that he may incline our hearts to him, to walk in all his ways,  to keep his commandments,  his statutes,  his ordinances, which he commanded our fathers.
Kgs. And let these my words, with which I have made supplication before Jehovah, be near to Jehovah our God day and night, that he maintain the cause of his servant,  the cause of his people Israel, as every day shall require,
Kgs. that all the peoples of the earth may know that Jehovah, he is God; there is none else.
Kgs. Let your heart therefore be perfect with Jehovah our God, to walk in his statutes,  to keep his commandments, as at this day.
Kgs. And the king,  all Israel with him, offered sacrifice before Jehovah.
Kgs. And Solomon offered for the sacrifice of peace offerings, which he offered to Jehovah, twenty-two thousand oxen,  a hundred and twenty thousand sheep. So the king and all the sons of Israel dedicated the house of Jehovah.
Kgs. The same day the king hallowed the middle of the court that was before the house of Jehovah, for there he offered the burnt offering,  the meal offering,  the fat of the peace offerings, because the brazen altar that was before Jehovah was too little to receive the burnt offering,  the meal offering,  the fat of the peace offerings.
Kgs. So Solomon held the feast at that time,  all Israel with him, a great assembly, from the entrance of Hamath to the brook of Egypt, before Jehovah our God, seven days and seven days, even fourteen days.
Kgs. On the eighth day he sent the people away. And they blessed the king,  went to their tents joyful and glad of heart for all the goodness that Jehovah had shown to David his servant,  to Israel his people.
Kgs. And it came to pass, when Solomon had finished the building of the house of Jehovah,  the king's house,  all Solomon's desire which he was pleased to do,
Kgs. that Jehovah appeared to Solomon the second time, as he had appeared to him at Gibeon.
Kgs. And Jehovah said to him, I have heard thy prayer and thy supplication, which thou have made before me. I have hallowed this house, which thou have built, to put my name there forever. And my eyes and my heart shall be there perpetually.
Kgs. And as for thee, if thou will walk before me, as David thy father walked, in integrity of heart,  in uprightness, to do according to all that I have commanded thee,  will keep my statutes and my ordinances,
Kgs. then I will establish the throne of thy kingdom over Israel forever, according as I promised to David thy father, saying, There shall not fail thee a man upon the throne of Israel.
Kgs. But if ye shall turn away from following me, ye or your sons,  not keep my commandments and my statutes which I have set before you,  shall go and serve other gods,  worship them,
Kgs. then will I cut off Israel out of the land which I have given them. And this house, which I have hallowed for my name, will I cast out of my sight. And Israel shall be a proverb and a byword among all peoples.
Kgs. And though this house is so high, yet shall every man who passes by it be astonished,  shall hiss. And they shall say, Why has Jehovah done thus to this land,  to this house?
Kgs. and they shall answer, Because they forsook Jehovah their God, who brought forth their fathers out of the land of Egypt,  laid hold on other gods,  worshiped them,  served them; therefore has Jehovah brought all this evil upon them.
Kgs. And it came to pass at the end of twenty years, in which Solomon had built the two houses, the house of Jehovah and the king's house
Kgs. (now Hiram the king of Tyre had furnished Solomon with cedar trees and fir trees,  with gold, according to all his desire), that king Solomon then gave Hiram twenty cities in the land of Galilee.
Kgs. And Hiram came out from Tyre to see the cities which Solomon had given him. And they did not please him.
Kgs. And he said, What cities are these which thou have given me, my brother? And he called them the land of Cabul to this day.
Kgs. And Hiram sent to the king one hundred and twenty talents of gold.
Kgs. And this is the reason for the conscription which king Solomon raised: to build the house of Jehovah,  his own house,  Millo,  the wall of Jerusalem,  Hazor,  Megiddo,  Gezer.
Kgs. Pharaoh king of Egypt had gone up,  taken Gezer,  burnt it with fire,  slain the Canaanites who dwelt in the city,  given it for a portion to his daughter, Solomon's wife.
Kgs. And Solomon built Gezer,  Beth-horon the nether,
Kgs. and Baalath,  Tamar in the wilderness, in the land,
Kgs. and all the store-cities that Solomon had,  the cities for his chariots,  the cities for his horsemen,  that which Solomon desired to build for his pleasure in Jerusalem,  in Lebanon,  in all the land of his dominion.
Kgs. As for all the people who were left of the Amorites, the Hittites, the Perizzites, the Hivites,  the Jebusites, who were not of the sons of Israel,
Kgs. their sons who were left after them in the land, whom the sons of Israel were not able utterly to destroy, of them Solomon raised a conscription of bondservants to this day.
Kgs. But of the sons of Israel Solomon made no bondservants,  they were the men of war,  his servants,  his rulers,  his captains,  rulers of his chariots and of his horsemen.
Kgs. These were the chief officers who were over Solomon's work, five hundred and fifty, who bore rule over the people that labored in the work.
Kgs. But Pharaoh's daughter came up out of the city of David to her house which Solomon had built for her. Then he built Millo.
Kgs. And three times a year Solomon offered burnt offerings and peace offerings upon the altar which he built to Jehovah, burning incense therewith, upon the altar that was before Jehovah. So he finished the house.
Kgs. And king Solomon made a navy of ships in Ezion-geber, which is beside Eloth, on the shore of the Red Sea, in the land of Edom.
Kgs. And Hiram sent in the navy his servants, shipmen who had knowledge of the sea, with the servants of Solomon.
Kgs. And they came to Ophir,  fetched gold from there, four hundred and twenty talents,  brought it to king Solomon.
Kgs. And when the queen of Sheba heard of the fame of Solomon concerning the name of Jehovah, she came to prove him with hard questions.
Kgs. And she came to Jerusalem with a very great train, with camels that bore spices,  very much gold,  precious stones. And when she came to Solomon, she conversed with him of all that was in her heart.
Kgs. And Solomon answered to her all her questions; there was not anything hid from the king which he did not answer.
Kgs. And when the queen of Sheba had seen all the wisdom of Solomon,  the house that he had built,
Kgs. and the food of his table,  the seating of his servants,  the attendance of his ministers,  their apparel,  his cupbearers,  his ascent by which he went up to the house of Jehovah, there was no more spirit in her.
Kgs. And she said to the king, It was a true report that I heard in my own land of thine acts,  of thy wisdom.
Kgs. However I did not believe the words until I came,  my eyes had seen it. And, behold, the half was not told me; thy wisdom and prosperity exceed the fame which I heard.
Kgs. Happy are thy men, happy are these thy servants, who stand continually before thee, who hear thy wisdom.
Kgs. Blessed be Jehovah thy God, who delighted in thee to set thee on the throne of Israel. Because Jehovah loved Israel forever, therefore he made thee king, to do justice and righteousness.
Kgs. And she gave the king a hundred and twenty talents of gold,  of spices a very great store,  precious stones. There came no more such abundance of spices as these which the queen of Sheba gave to king Solomon.
Kgs. And the navy also of Hiram, that brought gold from Ophir, brought in from Ophir great plenty of almug trees and precious stones.
Kgs. And the king made pillars of the almug trees for the house of Jehovah,  for the king's house, also harps and psalteries for the singers. There have come no such almug trees, nor were seen, to this day.
Kgs. And king Solomon gave to the queen of Sheba all her desire, whatever she asked, besides that which Solomon gave her of his royal bounty. So she turned,  went to her own land, she and her servants.
Kgs. Now the weight of gold that came to Solomon in one year was six hundred sixty and six talents of gold,
Kgs. besides that which the traders brought,  the traffic of the merchants,  of all the kings of Arabia,  of the governors of the country.
Kgs. And king Solomon made two hundred bucklers of beaten gold; six hundred shekels of gold went to one buckler.
Kgs. And he made three hundred shields of beaten gold; three pounds of gold went to one shield. And the king put them in the house of the forest of Lebanon.
Kgs. Moreover the king made a great throne of ivory,  overlaid it with the finest gold.
Kgs. There were six steps to the throne,  the top of the throne was round behind. And there were supports on either side by the place of the seat,  two lions standing beside the supports.
Kgs. And twelve lions stood there on the one side and on the other upon the six steps. There was not the like made in any kingdom.
Kgs. And all king Solomon's drinking vessels were of gold,  all the vessels of the house of the forest of Lebanon were of pure gold. None were of silver; it was accounted of nothing in the days of Solomon.
Kgs. For the king had at sea a navy of Tarshish with the navy of Hiram. Once every three years the navy of Tarshish came, bringing gold,  silver, ivory,  apes,  peacocks.
Kgs. So king Solomon exceeded all the kings of the earth in riches and in wisdom.
Kgs. And all the earth sought the presence of Solomon, to hear his wisdom, which God had put in his heart.
Kgs. And every man brought his tribute, vessels of silver,  vessels of gold,  raiment,  armor,  spices, horses,  mules, a rate year by year.
Kgs. And Solomon gathered together chariots and horsemen. And he had a thousand and four hundred chariots,  twelve thousand horsemen, that he bestowed in the chariot cities,  with the king at Jerusalem.
Kgs. And the king made silver to be in Jerusalem as stones,  cedars he made to be as the sycamore trees that are in the lowland, for abundance.
Kgs. And the horses which Solomon had were brought out of Egypt. And the king's merchants received them in herds, each herd at a price.
Kgs. And a chariot came up and went out of Egypt for six hundred shekels of silver,  a horse for a hundred and fifty. And so for all the kings of the Hittites,  for the kings of Syria, they brought them out by their means.
Kgs. Now king Solomon loved many foreign women, together with the daughter of Pharaoh, women of the Moabites, Ammonites, Edomites, Sidonians,  Hittites,
Kgs. of the nations concerning which Jehovah said to the sons of Israel, Ye shall not go among them, neither shall they come among you, for surely they will turn away your heart after their gods. Solomon clave to these in love.
Kgs. And he had seven hundred wives, princesses,  three hundred concubines. And his wives turned away his heart.
Kgs. For it came to pass, when Solomon was old, that his wives turned away his heart after other gods. And his heart was not perfect with Jehovah his God as was the heart of David his father.
Kgs. For Solomon went after Ashtoreth the goddess of the Sidonians,  after Milcom the abomination of the Ammonites.
Kgs. And Solomon did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah,  went not fully after Jehovah as did David his father.
Kgs. Then Solomon built a high place for Chemosh the abomination of Moab on the mount that is before Jerusalem,  for Molech the abomination of the sons of Ammon.
Kgs. And so he did for all his foreign wives, who burnt incense and sacrificed to their gods.
Kgs. And Jehovah was angry with Solomon because his heart was turned away from Jehovah, the God of Israel, who had appeared to him twice,
Kgs. and had commanded him concerning this thing, that he should not go after other gods. But he did not keep that which Jehovah commanded.
Kgs. Therefore Jehovah said to Solomon, Forasmuch as this is done by thee,  thou have not kept my covenant and my statutes, which I have commanded thee, I will surely rend the kingdom from thee,  will give it to thy servant.
Kgs. Notwithstanding I will not do it in thy days, for David thy father's sake,  I will rend it out of the hand of thy son.
Kgs. However I will not rend away all the kingdom,  I will give one tribe to thy son, for David my servant's sake,  for Jerusalem's sake which I have chosen.
Kgs. And Jehovah raised up an adversary to Solomon, Hadad the Edomite. He was of the king's seed in Edom.
Kgs. For it came to pass, when David was in Edom,  Joab the captain of the army was gone up to bury the slain,  had smitten every male in Edom
Kgs. (for Joab and all Israel remained there six months until he had cut off every male in Edom),
Kgs. that Hadad fled, he and certain Edomites of his father's servants with him, to go into Egypt, Hadad being yet a little child.
Kgs. And they arose out of Midian,  came to Paran. And they took men with them out of Paran,  they came to Egypt, to Pharaoh king of Egypt, who gave him a house,  appointed him provisions,  gave him land.
Kgs. And Hadad found great favor in the sight of Pharaoh, so that he gave him to wife the sister of his own wife, the sister of Tahpenes the queen.
Kgs. And the sister of Tahpenes bore him Genubath his son, whom Tahpenes weaned in Pharaoh's house. And Genubath was in Pharaoh's house among the sons of Pharaoh.
Kgs. And when Hadad heard in Egypt that David slept with his fathers,  that Joab the captain of the army was dead, Hadad said to Pharaoh, Let me depart that I may go to my own country.
Kgs. Then Pharaoh said to him, But what have thou lacked with me, that, behold, thou seek to go to thine own country? And he answered, Nothing, however only let me depart.
Kgs. And God raised up another adversary to him, Rezon the son of Eliada, who had fled from his lord Hadadezer king of Zobah.
Kgs. And he gathered men to him,  became captain over a troop when David killed them of Zobah. And they went to Damascus,  dwelt therein,  reigned in Damascus.
Kgs. And he was an adversary to Israel all the days of Solomon, besides the mischief that Hadad did. And he abhorred Israel,  reigned over Syria.
Kgs. And Jeroboam the son of Nebat, an Ephraimite of Zeredah, a servant of Solomon whose mother's name was Zeruah, a widow, he also lifted up his hand against the king.
Kgs. And this was the reason why he lifted up his hand against the king: Solomon built Millo,  repaired the breach of the city of David his father.
Kgs. And the man Jeroboam was a mighty man of valor. And Solomon saw the young man that he was industrious,  he gave him charge over all the labor of the house of Joseph.
Kgs. And it came to pass at that time, when Jeroboam went out of Jerusalem, that the prophet Ahijah the Shilonite found him in the way. Now Ahijah had clad himself with a new garment,  the two were alone in the field.
Kgs. And Ahijah laid hold of the new garment that was on him,  tore it in twelve pieces.
Kgs. And he said to Jeroboam, Take thee ten pieces, for thus says Jehovah, the God of Israel, Behold, I will rend the kingdom out of the hand of Solomon,  will give ten tribes to thee
Kgs. (but he shall have one tribe, for my servant David's sake and for Jerusalem's sake, the city which I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel),
Kgs. because that they have forsaken me,  have worshiped Ashtoreth the goddess of the Sidonians, Chemosh the god of Moab,  Milcom the god of the sons of Ammon. And they have not walked in my ways, to do that which is right in my eyes,  to keep my statutes and my ordinances as David his father did.
Kgs. However I will not take the whole kingdom out of his hand,  I will make him prince all the days of his life, for David my servant's sake whom I chose, who kept my commandments and my statutes.
Kgs. But I will take the kingdom out of his son's hand,  will give it to thee, even ten tribes.
Kgs. And I will give one tribe to his son, that David my servant may have a lamp always before me in Jerusalem, the city which I have chosen for me to put my name there.
Kgs. And I will take thee,  thou shall reign according to all that thy soul desires,  shall be king over Israel.
Kgs. And it shall be, if thou will hearken to all that I command thee,  will walk in my ways,  do that which is right in my eyes, to keep my statutes and my commandments, as David my servant did. That I will be with thee,  will build thee a sure house as I built for David,  will give Israel to thee.
Kgs. And for this I will afflict the seed of David,  not forever.
Kgs. Solomon therefore sought to kill Jeroboam. But Jeroboam arose,  fled into Egypt, to Shishak king of Egypt,  was in Egypt until the death of Solomon.
Kgs. Now the rest of the acts of Solomon,  all that he did,  his wisdom, are they not written in the book of the acts of Solomon?
Kgs. And the time that Solomon reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel was forty years.
Kgs. And Solomon slept with his fathers,  was buried in the city of David his father. And Rehoboam his son reigned in his stead.
Kgs. And Rehoboam went to Shechem, for all Israel came to Shechem to make him king.
Kgs. And it came to pass, when Jeroboam the son of Nebat heard of it (for he was yet in Egypt where he had fled from the presence of king Solomon,  Jeroboam dwelt in Egypt,
Kgs. and they sent and called him), that Jeroboam and all the assembly of Israel came,  spoke to Rehoboam, saying,
Kgs. Thy father made our yoke grievous. Now therefore make thou lighter the grievous service of thy father,  his heavy yoke which he put upon us,  we will serve thee.
Kgs. And he said to them, Depart yet for three days, then come again to me. And the people departed.
Kgs. And king Rehoboam took counsel with the old men who had stood before Solomon his father while he yet lived, saying, What counsel give ye to me to return an answer to this people?
Kgs. And they spoke to him, saying, If thou will be a servant to this people this day,  will serve them,  answer them,  speak good words to them, then they will be thy servants forever.
Kgs. But he forsook the counsel of the old men, which they had given him,  took counsel with the young men that grew up with him, who stood before him.
Kgs. And he said to them, What counsel give ye, that we may return an answer to this people who have spoken to me, saying, Make the yoke that thy father put upon us lighter?
Kgs. And the young men that grew up with him spoke to him, saying, Thus shall thou say to this people that spoke to thee, saying, Thy father made our yoke heavy,  make thou it lighter to us; thus shall thou speak to them, My little finger is thicker than my father's loins.
Kgs. And now whereas my father burdened you with a heavy yoke, I will add to your yoke. My father chastised you with whips,  I will chastise you with scorpions.
Kgs. So Jeroboam and all the people came to Rehoboam the third day, as the king bade, saying, Come to me again the third day.
Kgs. And the king answered the people roughly,  forsook the counsel of the old men which they had given him,
Kgs. and spoke to them after the counsel of the young men, saying, My father made your yoke heavy,  I will add to your yoke. My father chastised you with whips,  I will chastise you with scorpions.
Kgs. So the king did not hearken to the people, for it was a thing brought about by Jehovah, that he might establish his word, which Jehovah spoke by Ahijah the Shilonite to Jeroboam the son of Nebat.
Kgs. And when all Israel saw that the king did not hearken to them, the people answered the king, saying, What portion have we in David? Neither have we inheritance in the son of Jesse. To your tents, O Israel. Now see to thine own house, David. So Israel departed to their tents.
Kgs. But as for the sons of Israel who dwelt in the cities of Judah, Rehoboam reigned over them.
Kgs. Then king Rehoboam sent Adoram who was over the men subject to task work. And all Israel stoned him to death with stones. And king Rehoboam made speed to get up to his chariot, to flee to Jerusalem.
Kgs. So Israel rebelled against the house of David to this day.
Kgs. And it came to pass, when all Israel heard that Jeroboam was returned, that they sent and called him to the congregation,  made him king over all Israel. There was none that followed the house of David,  only the tribe of Judah.
Kgs. And when Rehoboam came to Jerusalem, he assembled all the house of Judah,  the tribe of Benjamin, a hundred and eighty thousand chosen men, who were warriors, to fight against the house of Israel, to bring the kingdom again to Rehoboam the son of Solomon.
Kgs. But the word of God came to Shemaiah the man of God, saying,
Kgs. Speak to Rehoboam the son of Solomon, king of Judah,  to all the house of Judah and Benjamin,  to the rest of the people, saying,
Kgs. Thus says Jehovah, Ye shall not go up, nor fight against your brothers the sons of Israel. Return every man to his house, for this thing is of me. So they hearkened to the word of Jehovah,  returned and went their way according to the word of Jehovah.
Kgs. Then Jeroboam built Shechem in the hill-country of Ephraim,  dwelt therein. And he went out from there,  built Penuel.
Kgs. And Jeroboam said in his heart, Now the kingdom will return to the house of David.
Kgs. If this people go up to offer sacrifices in the house of Jehovah at Jerusalem, then the heart of this people will turn again to their lord, even to Rehoboam king of Judah. And they will kill me,  return to Rehoboam king of Judah.
Kgs. Whereupon the king took counsel,  made two calves of gold. And he said to them, It is too much for you to go up to Jerusalem. Behold thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.
Kgs. And he set the one in Bethel,  the other he put in Dan.
Kgs. And this thing became a sin, for the people went to worship before the one, even to Dan.
Kgs. And he made houses of high places,  made priests from among all the people who were not of the sons of Levi.
Kgs. And Jeroboam ordained a feast in the eighth month, on the fifteenth day of the month, like the feast that is in Judah,  he went up to the altar. So he did in Bethel, sacrificing to the calves that he had made. And he placed in Bethel the priests of the high places that he had made.
Kgs. And he went up to the altar which he had made in Bethel on the fifteenth day in the eighth month, even in the month which he had devised of his own heart. And he ordained a feast for the sons of Israel,  went up to the altar to burn incense.
Kgs. And, behold, there came a man of God out of Judah by the word of Jehovah to Bethel. And Jeroboam was standing by the altar to burn incense.
Kgs. And he cried against the altar by the word of Jehovah,  said, O altar, altar, thus says Jehovah: Behold, a son shall be born to the house of David, Josiah by name. And upon thee shall he sacrifice the priests of the high places that burn incense upon thee,  men's bones they shall burn upon thee.
Kgs. And he gave a sign the same day, saying, This is the sign which Jehovah has spoken: Behold, the altar shall be torn,  the ashes that are upon it shall be poured out.
Kgs. And it came to pass, when the king heard the saying of the man of God, which he cried against the altar in Bethel, that Jeroboam put forth his hand from the altar, saying, Lay hold on him. And his hand, which he put forth against him, dried up, so that he could not draw it back again to him.
Kgs. The altar also was torn,  the ashes poured out from the altar, according to the sign which the man of God had given by the word of Jehovah.
Kgs. And the king answered and said to the man of God, Entreat now the favor of Jehovah thy God,  pray for me that my hand may be restored to me again. And the man of God entreated Jehovah,  the king's hand was restored to him again,  became as it was before.
Kgs. And the king said to the man of God, Come home with me,  refresh thyself,  I will give thee a reward.
Kgs. And the man of God said to the king, If thou will give me half thy house, I will not go in with thee, neither will I eat bread nor drink water in this place;
Kgs. for so it was charged me by the word of Jehovah, saying, Thou shall eat no bread, nor drink water, neither return by the way that thou came.
Kgs. So he went another way,  returned not by the way that he came to Bethel.
Kgs. Now there dwelt an old prophet in Bethel. And one of his sons came and told him all the works that the man of God had done that day in Bethel. The words which he had spoken to the king, they also told them to their father.
Kgs. And their father said to them, What way did he go? Now his sons had seen what way the man of God went, who came from Judah.
Kgs. And he said to his sons, Saddle the donkey for me. So they saddled him the donkey,  he rode on it.
Kgs. And he went after the man of God,  found him sitting under an oak. And he said to him, Are thou the man of God who came from Judah? And he said, I am.
Kgs. Then he said to him, Come home with me,  eat bread.
Kgs. And he said, I may not return with thee, nor go in with thee. Neither will I eat bread nor drink water with thee in this place;
Kgs. for it was said to me by the word of Jehovah, Thou shall eat no bread nor drink water there, nor turn again to go by the way that thou came.
Kgs. And he said to him, I also am a prophet as thou are. And an agent spoke to me by the word of Jehovah, saying, Bring him back with thee into thy house that he may eat bread and drink water. But he lied to him.
Kgs. So he went back with him,  ate bread in his house,  drank water.
Kgs. And it came to pass, as they sat at the table, that the word of Jehovah came to the prophet who brought him back.
Kgs. And he cried out to the man of God who came from Judah, saying, Thus says Jehovah, Forasmuch as thou have been disobedient to the mouth of Jehovah,  have not kept the commandment which Jehovah thy God commanded thee,
Kgs. but came back,  have eaten bread and drunk water in the place of which he said to thee, Eat no bread,  drink no water, thy body shall not come to the sepulcher of thy fathers.
Kgs. And it came to pass, after he had eaten bread,  after he had drunk, that he saddled the donkey for him, namely, for the prophet whom he had brought back.
Kgs. And when he was gone, a lion met him by the way,  killed him. And his body was cast in the way,  the donkey stood by it. The lion also stood by the body.
Kgs. And, behold, men passed by,  saw the body cast in the way,  the lion standing by the body. And they came and told it in the city where the old prophet dwelt.
Kgs. And when the prophet who brought him back from the way heard of it, he said, It is the man of God who was disobedient to the mouth of Jehovah. Therefore Jehovah has delivered him to the lion, which has torn him,  slain him, according to the word of Jehovah which he spoke to him.
Kgs. And he spoke to his sons, saying, Saddle the donkey for me. And they saddled it.
Kgs. And he went and found his body cast in the way,  the donkey and the lion standing by the body. The lion had not eaten the body, nor torn the donkey.
Kgs. And the prophet took up the body of the man of God,  laid it upon the donkey,  brought it back. And he came to the city of the old prophet, to mourn,  to bury him.
Kgs. And he laid his body in his own grave. And they mourned over him, saying, Alas, my brother!
Kgs. And it came to pass, after he had buried him, that he spoke to his sons, saying, When I am dead, then bury me in the sepulcher in which the man of God is buried. Lay my bones beside his bones.
Kgs. For the saying which he cried by the word of Jehovah against the altar in Bethel,  against all the houses of the high places which are in the cities of Samaria, shall surely come to pass.
Kgs. After this thing Jeroboam did not return from his evil way,  again made from among all the people priests of the high places. Whoever would, he consecrated him, that there might be priests of the high places.
Kgs. And this thing became sin to the house of Jeroboam, even to cut it off,  to destroy it from off the face of the earth.
Kgs. At that time Abijah the son of Jeroboam fell sick.
Kgs. And Jeroboam said to his wife, Arise, I pray thee,  disguise thyself that thou not be known to be the wife of Jeroboam,  get thee to Shiloh. Behold, there is Ahijah the prophet who spoke concerning me that I should be king over this people.
Kgs. And take with thee ten loaves,  cakes,  a cruse of honey,  go to him. He will tell thee what shall become of the child.
Kgs. And Jeroboam's wife did so,  arose,  went to Shiloh,  came to the house of Ahijah. Now Ahijah could not see, for his eyes were set because of his age.
Kgs. And Jehovah said to Ahijah, Behold, the wife of Jeroboam comes to inquire of thee concerning her son, for he is sick. Thus and thus thou shall say to her, for it will be, when she comes in, that she will feign herself to be another woman.
Kgs. And it was so, when Ahijah heard the sound of her feet, as she came in at the door, that he said, Come in, thou wife of Jeroboam. Why feign thou thyself to be another? For I am sent to thee with heavy news.
Kgs. Go, tell Jeroboam, Thus says Jehovah, the God of Israel: Forasmuch as I exalted thee from among the people,  made thee prince over my people Israel,
Kgs. and tore the kingdom away from the house of David,  gave it thee,  yet thou have not been as my servant David, who kept my commandments,  who followed me with all his heart to do only that which was right in my eyes,
Kgs. but have done evil above all who were before thee,  have gone and made thee other gods,  molten images to provoke me to anger,  have cast me behind thy back,
Kgs. therefore, behold, I will bring evil upon the house of Jeroboam,  will cut off from Jeroboam every man-child, he who is shut up and he who is left at large in Israel,  will utterly sweep away the house of Jeroboam as a man sweeps away dung, till it be all gone.
Kgs. He who dies of Jeroboam in the city shall the dogs eat,  he who dies in the field shall the birds of the heavens eat, for Jehovah has spoken it.
Kgs. Arise thou therefore, get thee to thy house. When thy feet enter into the city, the child shall die.
Kgs. And all Israel shall mourn for him,  bury him, for he only of Jeroboam shall come to the grave, because in him there is found some good thing toward Jehovah, the God of Israel, in the house of Jeroboam.
Kgs. Moreover Jehovah will raise up a king for him over Israel who shall cut off the house of Jeroboam that day. But what? Even now.
Kgs. For Jehovah will smite Israel as a reed is shaken in the water. And he will root up Israel out of this good land which he gave to their fathers,  will scatter them beyond the River because they have made their Asherim, provoking Jehovah to anger.
Kgs. And he will give Israel up because of the sins of Jeroboam, which he has sinned,  with which he has made Israel to sin.
Kgs. And Jeroboam's wife arose,  departed,  came to Tirzah. As she came to the threshold of the house, the child died.
Kgs. And all Israel buried him,  mourned for him, according to the word of Jehovah, which he spoke by his servant Ahijah the prophet.
Kgs. And the rest of the acts of Jeroboam, how he warred,  how he reigned, behold, they are written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel.
Kgs. And the days which Jeroboam reigned were twenty-two years,  he slept with his fathers. And Nadab his son reigned in his stead.
Kgs. And Rehoboam the son of Solomon reigned in Judah. Rehoboam was forty-one years old when he began to reign,  he reigned seventeen years in Jerusalem, the city which Jehovah had chosen out of all the tribes of Israel to put his name there. And his mother's name was Naamah the Ammonitess.
Kgs. And Judah did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah,  they provoked him to jealousy with their sins which they committed, above all that their fathers had done.
Kgs. For they also built for them high places,  pillars,  Asherim, on every high hill,  under every green tree.
Kgs. And there were also sodomites in the land. They did according to all the abominations of the nations which Jehovah drove out before the sons of Israel.
Kgs. And it came to pass in the fifth year of king Rehoboam, that Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem.
Kgs. And he took away the treasures of the house of Jehovah,  the treasures of the king's house. He even took away all. And he took away all the shields of gold which Solomon had made.
Kgs. And king Rehoboam made in their stead shields of brass,  committed them to the hands of the captains of the guard who kept the door of the king's house.
Kgs. And it was so, that, as often as the king went into the house of Jehovah, the guard bore them,  brought them back into the guard-chamber.
Kgs. Now the rest of the acts of Rehoboam,  all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
Kgs. And there was war between Rehoboam and Jeroboam continually.
Kgs. And Rehoboam slept with his fathers,  was buried with his fathers in the city of David. And his mother's name was Naamah the Ammonitess. And Abijah his son reigned in his stead.
Kgs. Now in the eighteenth year of king Jeroboam the son of Nebat, Abijah began to reign over Judah.
Kgs. He reigned three years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Maacah the daughter of Abishalom.
Kgs. And he walked in all the sins of his father, which he had done before him. And his heart was not perfect with Jehovah his God as the heart of David his father.
Kgs. Nevertheless for David's sake Jehovah his God gave him a lamp in Jerusalem, to set up his son after him,  to establish Jerusalem,
Kgs. because David did that which was right in the eyes of Jehovah,  did not turn aside from anything that he commanded him all the days of his life, except only in the matter of Uriah the Hittite.
Kgs. Now there was war between Rehoboam and Jeroboam all the days of his life.
Kgs. And the rest of the acts of Abijah,  all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah? And there was war between Abijah and Jeroboam.
Kgs. And Abijah slept with his fathers,  they buried him in the city of David. And Asa his son reigned in his stead.
Kgs. And in the twentieth year of Jeroboam king of Israel, Asa began to reign over Judah.
Kgs. And he reigned forty-one years in Jerusalem. And his grandmother's name was Maacah the daughter of Abishalom.
Kgs. And Asa did that which was right in the eyes of Jehovah as David his father did.
Kgs. And he put away the sodomites out of the land,  removed all the idols that his fathers had made.
Kgs. And also he removed Maacah his grandmother from being queen because she had made an abominable image for an Asherah. And Asa cut down her image,  burnt it at the brook Kidron.
Kgs. But the high places were not taken away. Nevertheless the heart of Asa was perfect with Jehovah all his days.
Kgs. And he brought into the house of Jehovah the things that his father had dedicated,  the things that he himself had dedicated, silver,  gold,  vessels.
Kgs. And there was war between Asa and Baasha king of Israel all their days.
Kgs. And Baasha king of Israel went up against Judah,  built Ramah, that he might not allow anyone to go out or come in to Asa king of Judah.
Kgs. Then Asa took all the silver and the gold that were left in the treasures of the house of Jehovah,  the treasures of the king's house,  delivered them into the hand of his servants. And king Asa sent them to Ben-hadad, the son of Tabrimmon, the son of Hezion, king of Syria, who dwelt at Damascus, saying,
Kgs. There is a league between me and thee, between my father and thy father. Behold, I have sent to thee a present of silver and gold. Go, break thy league with Baasha king of Israel, that he may depart from me.
Kgs. And Ben-hadad hearkened to king Asa,  sent the captains of his armies against the cities of Israel,  smote Ijon,  Dan,  Abel-beth-maacah,  all Chinneroth, with all the land of Naphtali.
Kgs. And it came to pass, when Baasha heard of it, that he left off building Ramah,  dwelt in Tirzah.
Kgs. Then king Asa made a proclamation to all Judah; none was exempted. And they carried away the stones of Ramah,  the timber of it, with which Baasha had built. And king Asa built with it Geba of Benjamin,  Mizpah.
Kgs. Now the rest of all the acts of Asa,  all his might,  all that he did,  the cities which he built, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah? But in the time of his old age he was diseased in his feet.
Kgs. And Asa slept with his fathers,  was buried with his fathers in the city of David his father. And Jehoshaphat his son reigned in his stead.
Kgs. And Nadab the son of Jeroboam began to reign over Israel in the second year of Asa king of Judah. And he reigned over Israel two years.
Kgs. And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah,  walked in the way of his father,  in his sin with which he made Israel to sin.
Kgs. And Baasha the son of Ahijah, of the house of Issachar, conspired against him. And Baasha smote him at Gibbethon, which belonged to the Philistines, for Nadab and all Israel were laying siege to Gibbethon.
Kgs. Baasha killed him in the third year of Asa king of Judah,  reigned in his stead.
Kgs. And it came to pass that, as soon as he was king, he smote all the house of Jeroboam. He left to Jeroboam not any who breathed, until he had destroyed him according to the saying of Jehovah, which he spoke by his servant Ahijah the Shilonite,
Kgs. for the sins of Jeroboam which he sinned,  with which he made Israel to sin, because of his provocation with which he provoked Jehovah, the God of Israel, to anger.
Kgs. Now the rest of the acts of Nadab,  all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
Kgs. And there was war between Asa and Baasha king of Israel all their days.
Kgs. In the third year of Asa king of Judah, Baasha the son of Ahijah began to reign over all Israel in Tirzah,  reigned twenty-four years.
Kgs. And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah,  walked in the way of Jeroboam,  in his sin with which he made Israel to sin.
Kgs. And the word of Jehovah came to Jehu the son of Hanani against Baasha, saying,
Kgs. Forasmuch as I exalted thee out of the dust,  made thee prince over my people Israel,  thou have walked in the way of Jeroboam,  have made my people Israel to sin, to provoke me to anger with their sins,
Kgs. behold, I will utterly sweep away Baasha and his house,  I will make thy house like the house of Jeroboam the son of Nebat.
Kgs. He of Baasha who dies in the city shall the dogs eat,  he of his who dies in the field shall the birds of the heavens eat.
Kgs. Now the rest of the acts of Baasha,  what he did,  his might, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
Kgs. And Baasha slept with his fathers,  was buried in Tirzah,  Elah his son reigned in his stead.
Kgs. And moreover the word of Jehovah came against Baasha by the prophet Jehu the son of Hanani,  against his house, both because of all the evil that he did in the sight of Jehovah, to provoke him to anger with the work of his hands in being like the house of Jeroboam,  because he smote him.
Kgs. In the twenty-sixth year of Asa king of Judah, Elah the son of Baasha began to reign over Israel in Tirzah,  reigned two years.
Kgs. And his servant Zimri, captain of half his chariots, conspired against him. Now he was in Tirzah, drinking himself drunk in the house of Arza, who was over the household in Tirzah.
Kgs. And Zimri went in and smote him,  killed him in the twenty-seventh year of Asa king of Judah,  reigned in his stead.
Kgs. And it came to pass, when he began to reign, as soon as he sat on his throne, that he smote all the house of Baasha. He left him not a single man-child, neither of his kinfolks, nor of his friends.
Kgs. Thus Zimri destroyed all the house of Baasha according to the word of Jehovah, which he spoke against Baasha by Jehu the prophet,
Kgs. for all the sins of Baasha,  the sins of Elah his son, which they sinned,  with which they made Israel to sin, to provoke Jehovah, the God of Israel, to anger with their vanities.
Kgs. Now the rest of the acts of Elah,  all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
Kgs. In the twenty-seventh year of Asa king of Judah Zimri reigned seven days in Tirzah. Now the people were encamped against Gibbethon, which belonged to the Philistines.
Kgs. And the people who were encamped heard say, Zimri has conspired,  has also smitten the king. Therefore all Israel made Omri, the captain of the army, king over Israel that day in the camp.
Kgs. And Omri went up from Gibbethon,  all Israel with him,  they besieged Tirzah.
Kgs. And it came to pass, when Zimri saw that the city was taken, that he went into the castle of the king's house,  burnt the king's house over him with fire,
Kgs. and died for his sins which he sinned in doing that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah, in walking in the way of Jeroboam,  in his sin which he did to make Israel to sin.
Kgs. Now the rest of the acts of Zimri,  his treason that he wrought, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
Kgs. Then the people of Israel were divided into two parts; half of the people followed Tibni the son of Ginath, to make him king,  half followed Omri.
Kgs. But the people who followed Omri prevailed against the people who followed Tibni the son of Ginath. So Tibni died,  Omri reigned.
Kgs. In the thirty-first year of Asa king of Judah, Omri began to reign over Israel,  reigned twelve years. He reigned six years in Tirzah.
Kgs. And he bought the hill Samaria of Shemer for two talents of silver. And he built on the hill,  called the name of the city which he built after the name of Shemer, the owner of the hill, Samaria.
Kgs. And Omri did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah,  dealt wickedly above all who were before him.
Kgs. For he walked in all the way of Jeroboam the son of Nebat,  in his sins with which he made Israel to sin, to provoke Jehovah, the God of Israel, to anger with their vanities.
Kgs. Now the rest of the acts of Omri which he did,  his might that he showed, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
Kgs. So Omri slept with his fathers,  was buried in Samaria,  Ahab his son reigned in his stead.
Kgs. And in the thirty-eighth year of Asa king of Judah, Ahab the son of Omri began to reign over Israel. And Ahab the son of Omri reigned over Israel in Samaria twenty-two years.
Kgs. And Ahab the son of Omri did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah above all who were before him.
Kgs. And it came to pass, as if it had been a light thing for him to walk in the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, that he took to wife Jezebel the daughter of Ethbaal king of the Sidonians,  went and served Baal,  worshiped him.
Kgs. And he reared up an altar for Baal in the house of Baal, which he had built in Samaria.
Kgs. And Ahab made the Asherah. And Ahab did yet more to provoke Jehovah, the God of Israel, to anger than all the kings of Israel who were before him.
Kgs. In his days did Hiel the Bethelite build Jericho. He laid the foundation of it with the loss of Abiram his firstborn,  set up the gates of it with the loss of his youngest son Segub, according to the word of Jehovah, which he spoke by Joshua the son of Nun.
Kgs. And Elijah the Tishbite, who was of the sojourners of Gilead, said to Ahab, As Jehovah, the God of Israel, lives, before whom I stand, there shall not be dew nor rain these years,  according to my word.
Kgs. And the word of Jehovah came to him, saying,
Kgs. Get thee from here,  turn thee eastward,  hide thyself by the brook Cherith that is before the Jordan.
Kgs. And it shall be, that thou shall drink of the brook,  I have commanded the ravens to feed thee there.
Kgs. So he went and did according to the word of Jehovah, for he went and dwelt by the brook Cherith that is before the Jordan.
Kgs. And the ravens brought him bread and flesh in the morning,  bread and flesh in the evening,  he drank of the brook.
Kgs. And it came to pass after a while, that the brook dried up because there was no rain in the land.
Kgs. And the word of Jehovah came to him, saying,
Kgs. Arise, get thee to Zarephath, which belongs to Sidon,  dwell there. Behold, I have commanded a widow there to sustain thee.
Kgs. So he arose and went to Zarephath. And when he came to the gate of the city, behold, a widow was there gathering sticks. And he called to her,  said, Fetch me, I pray thee, a little water in a vessel that I may drink.
Kgs. And as she was going to fetch it, he called to her,  said, Bring me, I pray thee, a morsel of bread in thy hand.
Kgs. And she said, As Jehovah thy God lives, I do not have a cake,  a handful of meal in the jar,  a little oil in the cruse. And, behold, I am gathering two sticks, that I may go in and dress it for me and my son that we may eat it,  die.
Kgs. And Elijah said to her, Fear not, go and do as thou have said. But make me of it a little cake first,  bring it forth to me,  afterward make for thee and for thy son.
Kgs. For thus says Jehovah, the God of Israel, The jar of meal shall not be used up, neither shall the cruse of oil fail, until the day that Jehovah sends rain upon the earth.
Kgs. And she went and did according to the saying of Elijah. And she,  he,  her house, ate many days.
Kgs. The jar of meal was not used up, neither did the cruse of oil fail, according to the word of Jehovah, which he spoke by Elijah.
Kgs. And it came to pass after these things, that the son of the woman, the mistress of the house, fell sick,  his sickness was so severe that there was no breath left in him.
Kgs. And she said to Elijah, What have I to do with thee, O thou man of God? Thou have come to me to bring my sin to remembrance,  to kill my son!
Kgs. And he said to her, Give me thy son. And he took him out of her bosom,  carried him up into the chamber where he abode,  laid him upon his own bed.
Kgs. And he cried to Jehovah,  said, O Jehovah my God, have thou also brought evil upon the widow with whom I sojourn by slaying her son?
Kgs. And he stretched himself upon the child three times,  cried to Jehovah,  said, O Jehovah my God, I pray thee, let this child's soul come into him again.
Kgs. And Jehovah hearkened to the voice of Elijah,  the soul of the child came into him again,  he revived.
Kgs. And Elijah took the child,  brought him down out of the chamber into the house,  delivered him to his mother. And Elijah said, See, thy son lives.
Kgs. And the woman said to Elijah, Now I know that thou are a man of God,  that the word of Jehovah in thy mouth is truth.
Kgs. And it came to pass after many days, that the word of Jehovah came to Elijah, in the third year, saying, Go, show thyself to Ahab,  I will send rain upon the earth.
Kgs. And Elijah went to show himself to Ahab. And the famine was severe in Samaria.
Kgs. And Ahab called Obadiah, who was over the household. (Now Obadiah feared Jehovah greatly;
Kgs. for it was so, when Jezebel cut off the prophets of Jehovah, that Obadiah took a hundred prophets,  hid them by fifties in a cave,  fed them with bread and water.)
Kgs. And Ahab said to Obadiah, Go through the land, to all the fountains of water,  to all the brooks. Perhaps we may find grass and save the horses and mules alive, that we not lose all the beasts.
Kgs. So they divided the land between them to pass throughout it; Ahab went one way by himself,  Obadiah went another way by himself.
Kgs. And as Obadiah was in the way, behold, Elijah met him. And he knew him,  fell on his face,  said, Is it thou, my lord Elijah?
Kgs. And he answered him, It is I. Go, tell thy lord, Behold, Elijah is here.
Kgs. And he said, How have I sinned that thou would deliver thy servant into the hand of Ahab to kill me?
Kgs. As Jehovah thy God lives, there is no nation or kingdom where my lord has not sent to seek thee. And when they said, He is not here, he took an oath from the kingdom and nation that they did not find thee.
Kgs. And now thou say, Go, tell thy lord, Behold, Elijah is here.
Kgs. And it will come to pass, as soon as I am gone from thee, that the Spirit of Jehovah will carry thee where I know not. And so when I come and tell Ahab,  he cannot find thee, he will kill me. But I thy servant fear Jehovah from my youth.
Kgs. Was it not told my lord what I did when Jezebel killed the prophets of Jehovah, how I hid a hundred men of Jehovah's prophets by fifties in a cave,  fed them with bread and water?
Kgs. And now thou say, Go, tell thy lord, Behold, Elijah is here,  he will kill me.
Kgs. And Elijah said, As Jehovah of hosts lives, before whom I stand, I will surely show myself to him today.
Kgs. So Obadiah went to meet Ahab,  told him,  Ahab went to meet Elijah.
Kgs. And it came to pass, when Ahab saw Elijah, that Ahab said to him, Is it thou, thou troubler of Israel?
Kgs. And he answered, I have not troubled Israel,  thou,  thy father's house, in that ye have forsaken the commandments of Jehovah,  thou have followed the Baalim.
Kgs. Now therefore send,  gather to me all Israel to mount Carmel,  the prophets of Baal four hundred and fifty,  the prophets of the Asherah four hundred, who eat at Jezebel's table.
Kgs. So Ahab sent to all the sons of Israel,  gathered the prophets together to mount Carmel.
Kgs. And Elijah came near to all the people,  said, How long do ye go limping between the two sides? If Jehovah be God, follow him,  if Baal, then follow him. And the people answered him not a word.
Kgs. Then Elijah said to the people, I, even I only, am left a prophet of Jehovah,  Baal's prophets are four hundred and fifty men.
Kgs. Let them therefore give us two bullocks,  let them choose one bullock for themselves,  cut it in pieces,  lay it on the wood,  put no fire under. And I will dress the other bullock,  lay it on the wood,  put no fire under.
Kgs. And call ye on the name of your god,  I will call on the name of Jehovah. And the God that answers by fire, let him be God. And all the people answered and said, It is well spoken.
Kgs. And Elijah said to the prophets of Baal, Choose you one bullock for yourselves,  dress it first, for ye are many,  call on the name of your god,  put no fire under.
Kgs. And they took the bullock which was given them,  they dressed it,  called on the name of Baal from morning even until noon, saying, O Baal, hear us. But there was no voice, nor any that answered. And they leaped about the altar which was made.
Kgs. And it came to pass at noon, that Elijah mocked them,  said, Cry aloud, for he is a god. Either he is meditating, or he is gone aside, or he is on a journey, or perhaps he sleeps and must be awakened.
Kgs. And they cried aloud,  cut themselves after their manner with knives and lances, till the blood gushed out upon them.
Kgs. And it was so, when midday was past, that they prophesied until the time of the offering of the evening oblation,  there was neither voice, nor any to answer, nor any that regarded.
Kgs. And Elijah said to all the people, Come near to me. And all the people came near to him. And he repaired the altar of Jehovah that was thrown down.
Kgs. And Elijah took twelve stones, according to the number of the tribes of the sons of Jacob to whom the word of Jehovah came, saying, Israel shall be thy name.
Kgs. And with the stones he built an altar in the name of Jehovah. And he made a trench around the altar, as great as would contain two measures of seed.
Kgs. And he put the wood in order,  cut the bullock in pieces,  laid it on the wood. And he said, Fill four jars with water,  pour it on the burnt offering,  on the wood.
Kgs. And he said, Do it the second time,  they did it the second time. And he said, Do it the third time,  they did it the third time.
Kgs. And the water ran round about the altar,  he also filled the trench with water.
Kgs. And it came to pass at the time of the offering of the evening oblation, that Elijah the prophet came near,  said, O Jehovah, the God of Abraham, of Isaac,  of Israel, let it be known this day that thou are God in Israel,  that I am thy servant,  that I have done all these things at thy word.
Kgs. Hear me, O Jehovah, hear me, that this people may know that thou, Jehovah, are God,  that thou have turned their heart back again.
Kgs. Then the fire of Jehovah fell,  consumed the burnt offering,  the wood,  the stones,  the dust,  licked up the water that was in the trench.
Kgs. And when all the people saw it, they fell on their faces. And they said, Jehovah, he is God, Jehovah, he is God.
Kgs. and Elijah said to them, Take the prophets of Baal; let not one of them escape. And they took them,  Elijah brought them down to the brook Kishon,  killed them there.
Kgs. And Elijah said to Ahab, Get thee up, eat and drink, for there is the sound of abundance of rain.
Kgs. So Ahab went up to eat and to drink. And Elijah went up to the top of Carmel,  he bowed himself down upon the earth,  put his face between his knees.
Kgs. And he said to his servant, Go up now, look toward the sea. And he went up,  looked,  said, There is nothing. And he said, Go again seven times.
Kgs. And it came to pass at the seventh time, that he said, Behold, a cloud rises out of the sea, as small as a man's hand. And he said, Go up, say to Ahab, Make ready thy chariot,  get thee down, that the rain not stop thee.
Kgs. And it came to pass in a little while, that the heavens grew black with clouds and wind,  there was a great rain. And Ahab rode,  went to Jezreel.
Kgs. And the hand of Jehovah was on Elijah,  he girded up his loins,  ran before Ahab to the entrance of Jezreel.
Kgs. And Ahab told Jezebel all that Elijah had done,  also how he had slain all the prophets with the sword.
Kgs. Then Jezebel sent a messenger to Elijah, saying, So let the gods do to me,  more also, if I do not make thy life as the life of one of them by tomorrow about this time.
Kgs. And when he saw that, he arose,  went for his life. And he came to Beersheba, which belongs to Judah,  left his servant there.
Kgs. But he himself went a day's journey into the wilderness,  came and sat down under a juniper tree. And he requested for himself that he might die,  said, It is enough, now, O Jehovah, take away my life, for I am no better than my fathers.
Kgs. And he lay down and slept under a juniper tree, , behold, an agent touched him,  said to him, Arise and eat.
Kgs. And he looked, , behold, there was at his head a cake baked on the coals,  a cruse of water. And he ate and drank,  laid him down again.
Kgs. And the agent of Jehovah came again the second time,  touched him,  said, Arise and eat because the journey is too great for thee.
Kgs. And he arose,  ate and drank,  went in the strength of that food forty days and forty nights to Horeb the mount of God.
Kgs. And he came to a cave there,  lodged there. And, behold, the word of Jehovah came to him,  he said to him, What are thou doing here, Elijah?
Kgs. And he said, I have been very jealous for Jehovah, the God of hosts. For the sons of Israel have forsaken thy covenant, thrown down thine altars,  slain thy prophets with the sword. And I, even I only, am left,  they seek my life, to take it away.
Kgs. And he said, Go forth,  stand upon the mount before Jehovah. And, behold, Jehovah passed by,  a great and strong wind tore the mountains,  broke in pieces the rocks before Jehovah,  Jehovah was not in the wind. And after the wind an earthquake,  Jehovah was not in the earthquake.
Kgs. And after the earthquake a fire,  Jehovah was not in the fire. And after the fire a still small voice.
Kgs. And it was so, when Elijah heard it, that he wrapped his face in his mantle,  went out,  stood in the entrance of the cave. And, behold, there came a voice to him,  said, What are thou doing here, Elijah?
Kgs. And he said, I have been very jealous for Jehovah, the God of hosts. For the sons of Israel have forsaken thy covenant, thrown down thine altars,  slain thy prophets with the sword. And I, even I only, am left,  they seek my life to take it away.
Kgs. And Jehovah said to him, Go, return on thy way to the wilderness of Damascus. And when thou come, thou shall anoint Hazael to be king over Syria.
Kgs. And thou shall anoint Jehu the son of Nimshi to be king over Israel. And thou shall anoint Elisha the son of Shaphat of Abel-meholah to be prophet in thy place.
Kgs. And it shall come to pass, that he who escapes from the sword of Hazael, Jehu shall kill. And he who escapes from the sword of Jehu, Elisha shall kill.
Kgs. Yet I have reserved for me seven thousand in Israel, all the knees which have not bowed to Baal,  every mouth which has not kissed him.
Kgs. So he departed from there,  found Elisha the son of Shaphat who was plowing with twelve yoke of oxen before him,  he with the twelfth. And Elijah passed over to him,  cast his mantle upon him.
Kgs. And he left the oxen,  ran after Elijah,  said, Let me, I pray thee, kiss my father and my mother,  then I will follow thee. And he said to him, Go back again, for what have I done to thee?
Kgs. And he returned from following him,  took the yoke of oxen,  killed them,  boiled their flesh with the instruments of the oxen,  gave to the people,  they ate. Then he arose,  went after Elijah,  ministered to him.
Kgs. And Ben-hadad the king of Syria gathered all his army together. And there were thirty-two kings with him,  horses and chariots. And he went up and besieged Samaria,  fought against it.
Kgs. And he sent messengers to Ahab king of Israel, into the city,  said to him, Thus says Ben-hadad,
Kgs. Thy silver and thy gold is mine, thy wives also and thy sons, even the best, are mine.
Kgs. And the king of Israel answered and said, It is according to thy saying, my lord, O king, I am thine,  all that I have.
Kgs. And the messengers came again,  said, Thus speaks Ben-hadad, saying, I indeed sent to thee, saying, Thou shall deliver to me thy silver,  thy gold,  thy wives,  thy sons.
Kgs. But I will send my servants to thee tomorrow about this time,  they shall search thy house,  the houses of thy servants. And it shall be, that whatever is pleasant in thine eyes, they shall put it in their hand,  take it away.
Kgs. Then the king of Israel called all the elders of the land,  said, Mark, I pray you,  see how this man seeks mischief, for he sent to me for my wives,  for my sons,  for my silver,  for my gold,  I did not deny him.
Kgs. And all the elders and all the people said to him, Do thou not hearken, nor consent.
Kgs. Therefore he said to the messengers of Ben-hadad, Tell my lord the king, All that thou sent for to thy servant at the first I will do,  this thing I may not do. And the messengers departed,  brought him word again.
Kgs. And Ben-hadad sent to him,  said, The gods do so to me,  more also, if the dust of Samaria shall suffice for handfuls for all the people that follow me.
Kgs. And the king of Israel answered and said, Tell him, Let not him who girds on his armor boast himself as he who puts it off.
Kgs. And it came to pass, when Ben-hadad heard this message as he was drinking, he and the kings, in the pavilions, that he said to his servants, Set yourselves in array. And they set themselves in array against the city.
Kgs. And, behold, a prophet came near to Ahab king of Israel,  said, Thus says Jehovah, Have thou seen all this great multitude? Behold, I will deliver it into thy hand this day,  thou shall know that I am Jehovah.
Kgs. And Ahab said, By whom? And he said, Thus says Jehovah, By the young men of the rulers of the provinces. Then he said, Who shall begin the battle? And he answered, Thou.
Kgs. Then he mustered the young men of the rulers of the provinces,  they were two hundred and thirty-two. And after them he mustered all the people, even all the sons of Israel, being seven thousand.
Kgs. And they went out at noon. But Ben-hadad was drinking himself drunk in the pavilions, he and the kings, the thirty-two kings who helped him.
Kgs. And the young men of the rulers of the provinces went out first. And Ben-hadad sent out,  they told him, saying, There are men come out from Samaria.
Kgs. And he said, Whether they come out for peace, take them alive, or whether they come out for war, take them alive.
Kgs. So these went out of the city, the young men of the rulers of the provinces,  the army which followed them.
Kgs. And they killed everyone his man. And the Syrians fled,  Israel pursued them. And Ben-hadad the king of Syria escaped on a horse with horsemen.
Kgs. And the king of Israel went out,  smote the horses and chariots,  killed the Syrians with a great slaughter.
Kgs. And the prophet came near to the king of Israel,  said to him, Go, strengthen thyself. And mark,  see what thou do, for at the return of the year the king of Syria will come up against thee.
Kgs. And the servants of the king of Syria said to him, Their god is a god of the hills, therefore they were stronger than we. But let us fight against them in the plain,  surely we shall be stronger than they.
Kgs. And do this thing: Take the kings away, every man out of his place,  put captains in their place.
Kgs. And number thee an army, like the army that thou have lost, horse for horse,  chariot for chariot. And we will fight against them in the plain,  surely we shall be stronger than they. And he hearkened to their voice,  did so.
Kgs. And it came to pass at the return of the year, that Ben-hadad mustered the Syrians,  went up to Aphek to fight against Israel.
Kgs. And the sons of Israel were mustered,  were supported,  went against them. And the sons of Israel encamped before them like two little flocks of kids,  the Syrians filled the country.
Kgs. And a man of God came near and spoke to the king of Israel,  said, Thus says Jehovah, Because the Syrians have said, Jehovah is a god of the hills,  he is not a god of the valleys, therefore I will deliver all this great multitude into thy hand,  ye shall know that I am Jehovah.
Kgs. And they encamped one opposite the other seven days. And so it was, that in the seventh day the battle was joined. And the sons of Israel killed of the Syrians a hundred thousand footmen in one day.
Kgs. But the rest fled to Aphek, into the city,  the wall fell upon twenty-seven thousand men who were left. And Ben-hadad fled,  came into the city, into an inner chamber.
Kgs. And his servants said to him, Behold now, we have heard that the kings of the house of Israel are merciful kings. Let us, we pray thee, put sackcloth on our loins,  ropes upon our heads,  go out to the king of Israel. Perhaps he will save thy life.
Kgs. So they girded sackcloth on their loins,  put ropes on their heads,  came to the king of Israel,  said, Thy servant Ben-hadad says, I pray thee, let me live. And he said, Is he yet alive? He is my brother.
Kgs. Now the men observed diligently whether anything would come from him. And they quickly caught it,  they said, Thy brother Ben-hadad. Then he said, Go ye, bring him. Then Ben-hadad came forth to him,  he caused him to come up into the chariot.
Kgs. And Ben-hadad said to him, The cities which my father took from thy father I will restore,  thou shall make streets for thee in Damascus as my father made in Samaria. And I, said Ahab, will let thee go with this covenant. So he made a covenant with him,  let him go.
Kgs. And a certain man of the sons of the prophets said by the word of Jehovah to his fellow, Smite me, I pray thee. And the man refused to smite him.
Kgs. Then said he to him, Because thou have not obeyed the voice of Jehovah, behold, as soon as thou are departed from me, a lion shall kill thee. And as soon as he was departed from him, a lion found him,  killed him.
Kgs. Then he found another man,  said, Smite me, I pray thee. And the man smote him, smiting and wounding him.
Kgs. So the prophet departed,  waited for the king by the way,  disguised himself with his headband over his eyes.
Kgs. And as the king passed by, he cried out to the king,  he said, Thy servant went out into the midst of the battle, , behold, a man turned aside,  brought a man to me,  said, Keep this man. If by any means he is missing, then shall thy life be for his life, or else thou shall pay a talent of silver.
Kgs. And as thy servant was busy here and there, he was gone. And the king of Israel said to him, So shall thy judgment be, thyself have decided it.
Kgs. And he hastened,  took the headband away from his eyes,  the king of Israel discerned him that he was of the prophets.
Kgs. And he said to him, Thus says Jehovah, Because thou have let go out of thy hand the man whom I had devoted to destruction, therefore thy life shall go for his life,  thy people for his people.
Kgs. And the king of Israel went to his house heavy and displeased,  came to Samaria.
Kgs. And it came to pass after these things, that Naboth the Jezreelite had a vineyard, which was in Jezreel, near by the palace of Ahab king of Samaria.
Kgs. And Ahab spoke to Naboth, saying, Give me thy vineyard that I may have it for a garden of herbs because it is near to my house. And I will give thee for it a better vineyard than it, or, if it seem good to thee, I will give thee the worth of it in money.
Kgs. And Naboth said to Ahab, Jehovah forbid it of me that I should give the inheritance of my fathers to thee.
Kgs. And Ahab came into his house heavy and displeased because of the word which Naboth the Jezreelite had spoken to him, for he had said, I will not give thee the inheritance of my fathers. And he laid himself down upon his bed,  turned away his face,  would eat no bread.
Kgs. But Jezebel his wife came to him,  said to him, Why is thy spirit so sad that thou eat no bread?
Kgs. And he said to her, Because I spoke to Naboth the Jezreelite,  said to him, Give me thy vineyard for money, or else, if it please thee, I will give thee another vineyard for it. And he answered, I will not give thee my vineyard.
Kgs. And Jezebel his wife said to him, Do thou now govern the kingdom of Israel? Arise,  eat bread,  let thy heart be merry. I will give thee the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite.
Kgs. So she wrote letters in Ahab's name,  sealed them with his seal,  sent the letters to the elders and to the nobles who were in his city,  who dwelt with Naboth.
Kgs. And she wrote in the letters, saying, Proclaim a fast,  set Naboth on high among the people.
Kgs. And set two men, base fellows, before him,  let them bear witness against him, saying, Thou cursed God and the king. And then carry him out,  stone him to death.
Kgs. And the men of his city, even the elders and the nobles who dwelt in his city, did as Jezebel had sent to them, according as it was written in the letters which she had sent to them.
Kgs. They proclaimed a fast,  set Naboth on high among the people.
Kgs. And the two men, the base fellows, came in and sat before him. And the base fellows bore witness against him, even against Naboth, in the presence of the people, saying, Naboth cursed God and the king. Then they carried him forth out of the city,  stoned him to death with stones.
Kgs. Then they sent to Jezebel, saying, Naboth is stoned,  is dead.
Kgs. And it came to pass, when Jezebel heard that Naboth was stoned,  was dead, that Jezebel said to Ahab, Arise, take possession of the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite, which he refused to give thee for money, for Naboth is not alive,  dead.
Kgs. And it came to pass, when Ahab heard that Naboth was dead, that Ahab rose up to go down to the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite to take possession of it.
Kgs. And the word of Jehovah came to Elijah the Tishbite, saying,
Kgs. Arise, go down to meet Ahab king of Israel, who dwells in Samaria. Behold, he is in the vineyard of Naboth where he has gone down to take possession of it.
Kgs. And thou shall speak to him, saying, Thus says Jehovah, Have thou killed and also taken possession? And thou shall speak to him, saying, Thus says Jehovah, In the place where dogs licked the blood of Naboth shall dogs lick thy blood, even thine.
Kgs. And Ahab said to Elijah, Have thou found me, O my enemy? And he answered, I have found thee because thou have sold thyself to do that which is evil in the sight of Jehovah.
Kgs. Behold, I will bring evil upon thee,  will utterly sweep thee away and will cut off from Ahab every man-child,  he who is shut up and he who is left at large in Israel.
Kgs. And I will make thy house like the house of Jeroboam the son of Nebat,  like the house of Baasha the son of Ahijah for the provocation with which thou have provoked me to anger,  have made Israel to sin.
Kgs. And Jehovah spoke also of Jezebel, saying, The dogs shall eat Jezebel by the rampart of Jezreel.
Kgs. He who dies of Ahab in the city the dogs shall eat,  he who dies in the field shall the birds of the heavens eat.
Kgs. (But there was none like Ahab, who sold himself to do that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah, whom Jezebel his wife stirred up.
Kgs. And he did very abominably in following idols, according to all that the Amorites did whom Jehovah cast out before the sons of Israel.)
Kgs. And it came to pass, when Ahab heard those words, that he tore his clothes,  put sackcloth upon his flesh,  fasted,  lay in sackcloth,  went softly.
Kgs. And the word of Jehovah came to Elijah the Tishbite, saying,
Kgs. See thou how Ahab humbles himself before me? Because he humbles himself before me, I will not bring the evil in his days,  in his son's days will I bring the evil upon his house.
Kgs. And they continued three years without war between Syria and Israel.
Kgs. And it came to pass in the third year, that Jehoshaphat the king of Judah came down to the king of Israel.
Kgs. And the king of Israel said to his servants, Know ye that Ramoth-gilead is ours,  we are still,  do not take it out of the hand of the king of Syria?
Kgs. And he said to Jehoshaphat, Will thou go with me to battle to Ramoth-gilead? And Jehoshaphat said to the king of Israel, I am as thou are, my people as thy people, my horses as thy horses.
Kgs. And Jehoshaphat said to the king of Israel, Inquire first, I pray thee, for the word of Jehovah.
Kgs. Then the king of Israel gathered the prophets together, about four hundred men,  said to them, Shall I go against Ramoth-gilead to battle, or shall I forbear? And they said, Go up, for the Lord will deliver it into the hand of the king.
Kgs. But Jehoshaphat said, Is there not here a prophet of Jehovah besides, that we may inquire of him?
Kgs. And the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, there is yet one man by whom we may inquire of Jehovah, Micaiah the son of Imlah,  I hate him, for he does not prophesy good concerning me,  evil. And Jehoshaphat said, Let not the king say so.
Kgs. Then the king of Israel called an officer,  said, Fetch quickly Micaiah the son of Imlah.
Kgs. Now the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah were sitting each on his throne, arrayed in their robes, in an open place at the entrance of the gate of Samaria. And all the prophets were prophesying before them.
Kgs. And Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah made for him horns of iron,  said, Thus says Jehovah, With these thou shall push the Syrians until they be consumed.
Kgs. And all the prophets prophesied so, saying, Go up to Ramoth-gilead,  prosper, for Jehovah will deliver it into the hand of the king.
Kgs. And the messenger who went to call Micaiah spoke to him, saying, Behold now, the words of the prophets declare good to the king with one mouth. Let thy word, I pray thee, be like the word of one of them,  speak thou good.
Kgs. And Micaiah said, As Jehovah lives, what Jehovah says to me, that I will speak.
Kgs. And when he came to the king, the king said to him, Micaiah, shall we go to Ramoth-gilead to battle, or shall we forbear? And he answered him, Go up and prosper,  Jehovah will deliver it into the hand of the king.
Kgs. And the king said to him, How many times shall I adjure thee that thou speak to me nothing but the truth in the name of Jehovah?
Kgs. And he said, I saw all Israel scattered upon the mountains, as sheep that have no shepherd. And Jehovah said, These have no master, let them return every man to his house in peace.
Kgs. And the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, Did I not tell thee that he would not prophesy good concerning me,  evil?
Kgs. And Micaiah said, Therefore hear thou the word of Jehovah. I saw Jehovah sitting on his throne,  all the host of heaven standing by him on his right hand and on his left.
Kgs. And Jehovah said, Who shall entice Ahab, that he may go up and fall at Ramoth-gilead? And one said on this manner,  another said on that manner.
Kgs. And there came forth a spirit,  stood before Jehovah,  said, I will entice him.
Kgs. And Jehovah said to him, With what? And he said, I will go forth,  will be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his prophets. And he said, Thou shall entice him,  shall also prevail. Go forth,  do so.
Kgs. Now therefore, behold, Jehovah has put a lying spirit in the mouth of all these thy prophets,  Jehovah has spoken evil concerning thee.
Kgs. Then Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah came near,  smote Micaiah on the cheek,  said, Which way did the Spirit of Jehovah go from me to speak to thee?
Kgs. And Micaiah said, Behold, thou shall see on that day when thou shall go into an inner chamber to hide thyself.
Kgs. And the king of Israel said, Take Micaiah,  carry him back to Amon the governor of the city,  to Joash the king's son,
Kgs. and say, Thus says the king, Put this fellow in the prison,  feed him with bread of affliction and with water of affliction until I come in peace.
Kgs. And Micaiah said, If thou return at all in peace, Jehovah has not spoken by me. And he said, Hear, ye peoples, all of you.
Kgs. So the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah went up to Ramoth-gilead.
Kgs. And the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, I will disguise myself,  go into the battle,  put thou on thy robes. And the king of Israel disguised himself,  went into the battle.
Kgs. Now the king of Syria had commanded the thirty-two captains of his chariots, saying, Fight neither with small nor great, except only with the king of Israel.
Kgs. And it came to pass, when the captains of the chariots saw Jehoshaphat, that they said, Surely it is the king of Israel,  they turned aside to fight against him. And Jehoshaphat cried out.
Kgs. And it came to pass, when the captains of the chariots saw that it was not the king of Israel, that they turned back from pursuing him.
Kgs. And a certain man drew his bow at a venture,  smote the king of Israel between the joints of the armor. Therefore he said to the driver of his chariot, Turn thy hand,  carry me out of the army, for I am severely wounded.
Kgs. And the battle increased that day. And the king was propped up in his chariot against the Syrians. And he died at evening,  the blood ran out of the wound into the bottom of the chariot.
Kgs. And there went a cry throughout the army about the going down of the sun, saying, Every man to his city,  every man to his country.
Kgs. So the king died,  was brought to Samaria,  they buried the king in Samaria.
Kgs. And they washed the chariot by the pool of Samaria,  the dogs licked up his blood (now the harlots washed themselves there), according to the word of Jehovah which he spoke.
Kgs. Now the rest of the acts of Ahab,  all that he did,  the ivory house which he built,  all the cities that he built, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
Kgs. So Ahab slept with his fathers,  Ahaziah his son reigned in his stead.
Kgs. And Jehoshaphat the son of Asa began to reign over Judah in the fourth year of Ahab king of Israel.
Kgs. Jehoshaphat was thirty-five years old when he began to reign,  he reigned twenty-five years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Azubah the daughter of Shilhi.
Kgs. And he walked in all the way of Asa his father. He turned not aside from it, doing that which was right in the eyes of Jehovah. However the high places were not taken away; the people still sacrificed and burnt incense in the high places.
Kgs. And Jehoshaphat made peace with the king of Israel.
Kgs. Now the rest of the acts of Jehoshaphat,  his might that he showed,  how he warred, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
Kgs. And he put away out of the land the remnant of the sodomites, who remained in the days of his father Asa.
Kgs. And there was no king in Edom; a deputy was king.
Kgs. Jehoshaphat made ships of Tarshish to go to Ophir for gold,  they did not go, for the ships were broken at Ezion-geber.
Kgs. Then Ahaziah the son of Ahab said to Jehoshaphat, Let my servants go with thy servants in the ships. But Jehoshaphat would not.
Kgs. And Jehoshaphat slept with his fathers,  was buried with his fathers in the city of David his father. And Jehoram his son reigned in his stead.
Kgs. Ahaziah the son of Ahab began to reign over Israel in Samaria in the seventeenth year of Jehoshaphat king of Judah,  he reigned two years over Israel.
Kgs. And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah,  walked in the way of his father,  in the way of his mother,  in the way of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, how he made Israel to sin.
Kgs. And he served Baal,  worshiped him,  provoked to anger Jehovah, the God of Israel, according to all that his father had done.
II Kings
Kgs. And Moab rebelled against Israel after the death of Ahab.
Kgs. And Ahaziah fell down through the lattice in his upper chamber that was in Samaria,  was sick. And he sent messengers,  said to them, Go, inquire of Baal-zebub, the god of Ekron, whether I shall recover of this sickness.
Kgs. But the agent of Jehovah said to Elijah the Tishbite, Arise, go up to meet the messengers of the king of Samaria,  say to them, Is it because there is no God in Israel that ye go to inquire of Baal-zebub, the god of Ekron?
Kgs. Now therefore thus says Jehovah, Thou shall not come down from the bed where thou have gone up,  shall surely die. And Elijah departed.
Kgs. And the messengers returned to him,  he said to them, Why is it that ye are returned?
Kgs. And they said to him, There came up a man to meet us,  said to us, Go, turn again to the king that sent you,  say to him, Thus says Jehovah, Is it because there is no God in Israel that thou send to inquire of Baal-zebub, the god of Ekron? Therefore thou shall not come down from the bed where thou have gone up,  shall surely die.
Kgs. And he said to them, What manner of man was he who came up to meet you,  told you these words?
Kgs. And they answered him, He was a hairy man,  girt with a belt of leather about his loins. And he said, It is Elijah the Tishbite.
Kgs. Then the king sent to him a captain of fifty with his fifty. And he went up to him, , behold, he was sitting on the top of the hill. And he spoke to him, O man of God, the king has said, Come down.
Kgs. And Elijah answered and said to the captain of fifty, If I be a man of God, let fire come down from heaven,  consume thee and thy fifty. And there came down fire from heaven,  consumed him and his fifty.
Kgs. And again he sent to him another captain of fifty and his fifty. And he answered and said to him, O man of God, thus has the king said, Come down quickly.
Kgs. And Elijah answered and said to them, If I be a man of God, let fire come down from heaven,  consume thee and thy fifty. And the fire of God came down from heaven,  consumed him and his fifty.
Kgs. And again he sent the captain of a third fifty with his fifty. And the third captain of fifty went up,  came and fell on his knees before Elijah,  besought him,  said to him, O man of God, I pray thee, let my life,  the life of these fifty thy servants, be precious in thy sight.
Kgs. Behold, there came fire down from heaven,  consumed the two former captains of fifty with their fifties,  now let my life be precious in thy sight.
Kgs. And the agent of Jehovah said to Elijah, Go down with him; do not be afraid of him. And he arose,  went down with him to the king.
Kgs. And he said to him, Thus says Jehovah, Inasmuch as thou have sent messengers to inquire of Baal-zebub, the god of Ekron, is it because there is no God in Israel to inquire of his word? Therefore thou shall not come down from the bed where thou have gone up,  shall surely die.
Kgs. So he died according to the word of Jehovah which Elijah had spoken. And Jehoram began to reign in his stead in the second year of Jehoram the son of Jehoshaphat king of Judah, because he had no son.
Kgs. Now the rest of the acts of Ahaziah which he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
Kgs. And it came to pass, when Jehovah would take up Elijah by a whirlwind into heaven, that Elijah went with Elisha from Gilgal.
Kgs. And Elijah said to Elisha, Remain here, I pray thee, for Jehovah has sent me as far as Bethel. And Elisha said, As Jehovah lives,  as thy soul lives, I will not leave thee. So they went down to Bethel.
Kgs. And the sons of the prophets who were at Bethel came forth to Elisha,  said to him, Do thou know that Jehovah will take away thy master from thy head today? And he said, Yes, I know it; hold ye your peace.
Kgs. And Elijah said to him, Elisha, remain here, I pray thee, for Jehovah has sent me to Jericho. And he said, As Jehovah lives,  as thy soul lives, I will not leave thee. So they came to Jericho.
Kgs. And the sons of the prophets who were at Jericho came near to Elisha,  said to him, Do thou know that Jehovah will take away thy master from thy head today? And he answered, Yes, I know it; hold ye your peace.
Kgs. And Elijah said to him, Remain here, I pray thee, for Jehovah has sent me to the Jordan. And he said, As Jehovah lives,  as thy soul lives, I will not leave thee. And the two went on.
Kgs. And fifty men of the sons of the prophets went,  stood opposite them afar off. And the two stood by the Jordan.
Kgs. And Elijah took his mantle,  wrapped it together,  struck the waters,  they were divided here and there, so that the two went over on dry ground.
Kgs. And it came to pass, when they were gone over, that Elijah said to Elisha, Ask what I shall do for thee before I am taken from thee. And Elisha said, I pray thee, let a double portion of thy spirit be upon me.
Kgs. And he said, Thou have asked a hard thing. Nevertheless, if thou see me when I am taken from thee, it shall be so to thee,  if not, it shall not be so.
Kgs. And it came to pass, as they still went on,  talked, that, behold, there appeared a chariot of fire,  horses of fire, which divided them both apart. And Elijah went up by a whirlwind into heaven.
Kgs. And Elisha saw it,  he cried, My father, my father, the chariots of Israel and the horsemen of it! And he saw him no more. And he took hold of his own clothes,  tore them in two pieces.
Kgs. He also took up the mantle of Elijah that fell from him,  went back,  stood by the bank of the Jordan.
Kgs. And he took the mantle of Elijah that fell from him,  struck the waters,  said, Where is Jehovah, the God of Elijah? And when he also had smitten the waters, they were divided here and there,  Elisha went over.
Kgs. And when the sons of the prophets who were at Jericho opposite him saw him, they said, The spirit of Elijah rests on Elisha. And they came to meet him,  bowed themselves to the ground before him.
Kgs. And they said to him, Behold now, there are fifty strong men with thy servants. Let them go, we pray thee,  seek thy master, lest the Spirit of Jehovah has taken him up,  cast him upon some mountain, or into some valley. And he said, Ye shall not send.
Kgs. And when they urged him till he was ashamed, he said, Send. Therefore they sent fifty men. And they sought three days,  did not find him.
Kgs. And they came back to him while he remained at Jericho. And he said to them, Did I not say to you, Do not go?
Kgs. And the men of the city said to Elisha, Behold, we pray thee, the situation of this city is pleasant, as my lord sees,  the water is bad,  the ground barren.
Kgs. And he said, Bring me a new cruse,  put salt therein. And they brought it to him.
Kgs. And he went forth to the spring of the waters,  cast salt therein,  said, Thus says Jehovah, I have healed these waters. There shall not be from there any more death or barren land.
Kgs. So the waters were healed to this day, according to the word of Elisha which he spoke.
Kgs. And he went up from there to Bethel. And as he was going up by the way, there came forth young lads out of the city,  mocked him,  said to him, Go up, thou baldhead; go up, thou baldhead.
Kgs. And he looked behind him and saw them,  cursed them in the name of Jehovah. And there came forth two she-bears out of the wood,  tore forty-two lads of them.
Kgs. And he went from there to mount Carmel,  from there he returned to Samaria.
Kgs. Now Jehoram the son of Ahab began to reign over Israel in Samaria in the eighteenth year of Jehoshaphat king of Judah,  reigned twelve years.
Kgs. And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah,  not like his father and like his mother, for he put away the pillar of Baal that his father had made.
Kgs. Nevertheless he clung to the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, with which he made Israel to sin; he did not depart therefrom.
Kgs. Now Mesha king of Moab was a sheep-master. And he rendered to the king of Israel the wool of a hundred thousand lambs,  of a hundred thousand rams.
Kgs. But it came to pass, when Ahab was dead, that the king of Moab rebelled against the king of Israel.
Kgs. And king Jehoram went out of Samaria at that time,  mustered all Israel.
Kgs. And he went and sent to Jehoshaphat the king of Judah, saying, The king of Moab has rebelled against me. Will thou go with me against Moab to battle? And he said, I will go up. I am as thou are, my people as thy people, my horses as thy horses.
Kgs. And he said, Which way shall we go up? And he answered, The way of the wilderness of Edom.
Kgs. So the king of Israel went,  the king of Judah,  the king of Edom. And they made a circuit of seven days' journey,  there was no water for the army, nor for the beasts that followed them.
Kgs. And the king of Israel said, Alas! For Jehovah has called these three kings together to deliver them into the hand of Moab.
Kgs. But Jehoshaphat said, Is there not here a prophet of Jehovah, that we may inquire of Jehovah by him? And one of the king of Israel's servants answered and said, Elisha the son of Shaphat is here, who poured water on the hands of Elijah.
Kgs. And Jehoshaphat said, The word of Jehovah is with him. So the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat and the king of Edom went down to him.
Kgs. And Elisha said to the king of Israel, What have I to do with thee? Get thee to the prophets of thy father,  to the prophets of thy mother. And the king of Israel said to him, No, for Jehovah has called these three kings together to deliver them into the hand of Moab.
Kgs. And Elisha said, As Jehovah of hosts lives, before whom I stand, surely, were it not that I regard the presence of Jehoshaphat the king of Judah, I would not look toward thee, nor see thee.
Kgs. But now bring me a minstrel. And it came to pass, when the minstrel played, that the hand of Jehovah came upon him.
Kgs. And he said, Thus says Jehovah, Make this valley full of trenches.
Kgs. For thus says Jehovah, Ye shall not see wind, neither shall ye see rain, yet that valley shall be filled with water,  ye shall drink, both ye and your cattle and your beasts.
Kgs. And this is but a light thing in the sight of Jehovah. He will also deliver the Moabites into your hand.
Kgs. And ye shall smite every fortified city,  every choice city,  shall fell every good tree,  stop all fountains of water,  mar every good piece of land with stones.
Kgs. And it came to pass in the morning, about the time of offering the oblation, that, behold, there came water by the way of Edom,  the country was filled with water.
Kgs. Now when all the Moabites heard that the kings came up to fight against them, they gathered themselves together, all that were able to put on armor,  upward,  stood on the border.
Kgs. And they rose up early in the morning,  the sun shone upon the water,  the Moabites saw the water opposite them as red as blood.
Kgs. And they said, This is blood. The kings are surely destroyed,  they have smitten each man his fellow. Now therefore, Moab, to the spoil.
Kgs. And when they came to the camp of Israel, the Israelites rose up and smote the Moabites, so that they fled before them,  they went forward into the land smiting the Moabites.
Kgs. And they beat down the cities. And on every good piece of land they cast every man his stone,  filled it. And they stopped all the fountains of water,  felled all the good trees, until in Kir-hareseth only they left the stones of it. However the slingers went about it,  smote it.
Kgs. And when the king of Moab saw that the battle was too hard for him, he took with him seven hundred men that drew sword to break through to the king of Edom,  they could not.
Kgs. Then he took his eldest son who should have reigned in his stead,  offered him for a burnt offering upon the wall. And there was great wrath against Israel,  they departed from him,  returned to their own land.
Kgs. Now a certain woman of the wives of the sons of the prophets cried out to Elisha, saying, Thy servant my husband is dead,  thou know that thy servant feared Jehovah,  the creditor has come to take my two children to him to be bondmen.
Kgs. And Elisha said to her, What shall I do for thee? Tell me, what have thou in the house? And she said, Thy handmaid has not anything in the house except a pot of oil.
Kgs. Then he said, Go, borrow for thee vessels abroad from all thy neighbors, even empty vessels; borrow not a few.
Kgs. And thou shall go in,  shut the door upon thee and upon thy sons,  pour out into all those vessels,  thou shall set aside that which is full.
Kgs. So she went from him,  shut the door upon her and upon her sons. They brought the vessels to her,  she poured out.
Kgs. And it came to pass, when the vessels were full, that she said to her son, Bring me yet a vessel. And he said to her, There is no more a vessel. And the oil halted.
Kgs. Then she came and told the man of God. And he said, Go, sell the oil,  pay thy debt,  live thou and thy sons from the rest.
Kgs. And it fell on a day that Elisha passed to Shunem where there was a prominent woman. And she constrained him to eat bread. And so it was, that as often as he passed by he turned in there to eat bread.
Kgs. And she said to her husband, Behold now, I perceive that this is a holy man of God who passes by us continually.
Kgs. Let us make, I pray thee, a little chamber on the wall. And let us set a bed for him there,  a table,  a seat,  a lampstand. And it shall be, when he comes to us, that he shall turn in there.
Kgs. And it fell on a day that he came there,  he turned into the chamber and lay there.
Kgs. And he said to Gehazi his servant, Call this Shunammite. And when he had called her, she stood before him.
Kgs. And he said to him, Say now to her, Behold, thou have been caring for us with all this care. What is to be done for thee? Would thou be spoken for to the king, or to the captain of the army? And she answered, I dwell among my own people.
Kgs. And he said, What then is to be done for her? And Gehazi answered, Truly she has no son,  her husband is old.
Kgs. And he said, Call her. And when he had called her, she stood in the door.
Kgs. And he said, At this season, when the time comes round, thou shall embrace a son. And she said, No, my lord, thou man of God, do not lie to thy handmaid.
Kgs. And the woman conceived,  bore a son at that season, when the time came round, as Elisha had said to her.
Kgs. And when the child was grown, it fell on a day that he went out to his father to the reapers.
Kgs. And he said to his father, My head, my head. And he said to his servant, Carry him to his mother.
Kgs. And when he had taken him,  brought him to his mother, he sat on her knees till noon,  then died.
Kgs. And she went up and laid him on the bed of the man of God,  shut the door upon him,  went out.
Kgs. And she called to her husband,  said, Send me, I pray thee, one of the servants,  one of the donkeys, that I may run to the man of God,  come again.
Kgs. And he said, Why will thou go to him today? It is neither new moon nor sabbath. And she said, It shall be well.
Kgs. Then she saddled a donkey,  said to her servant, Drive,  go forward. Do not restrain my riding unless I bid thee.
Kgs. So she went,  came to the man of God to mount Carmel. And it came to pass, when the man of God saw her afar off, that he said to Gehazi his servant, Behold, yonder is the Shunammite.
Kgs. Run now, I pray thee, to meet her,  say to her, Is it well with thee? Is it well with thy husband? Is it well with the child? And she answered, It is well.
Kgs. And when she came to the man of God to the hill, she caught hold of his feet. And Gehazi came near to thrust her away,  the man of God said, Let her alone, for her soul is vexed within her,  Jehovah has hid it from me,  has not told me.
Kgs. Then she said, Did I desire a son of my lord? Did I not say, do not deceive me?
Kgs. Then he said to Gehazi, Gird up thy loins,  take my staff in thy hand,  go thy way. If thou meet any man, do not salute him,  if any salute thee, do not answer him again. And lay my staff upon the face of the child.
Kgs. And the mother of the child said, As Jehovah lives,  as thy soul lives, I will not leave thee. And he arose,  followed her.
Kgs. And Gehazi passed on before them,  laid the staff upon the face of the child,  there was neither voice, nor hearing. Therefore he returned to meet him,  told him, saying, The child has not awakened.
Kgs. And when Elisha came into the house, behold, the child was dead,  laid upon his bed.
Kgs. He went in therefore,  shut the door upon the two of them,  prayed to Jehovah.
Kgs. And he went up,  lay upon the child,  put his mouth upon his mouth,  his eyes upon his eyes,  his hands upon his hands. And he stretched himself upon him,  the flesh of the child grew warm.
Kgs. Then he returned,  walked in the house once to and fro,  went up,  stretched himself upon him. And the child sneezed seven times,  the child opened his eyes.
Kgs. And he called Gehazi,  said, Call this Shunammite. So he called her. And when she came in to him, he said, Take up thy son.
Kgs. Then she went in,  fell at his feet,  bowed herself to the ground. And she took up her son,  went out.
Kgs. And Elisha came again to Gilgal. And there was a dearth in the land,  the sons of the prophets were sitting before him. And he said to his servant, Set on the great pot,  boil pottage for the sons of the prophets.
Kgs. And one went out into the field to gather herbs,  found a wild vine,  gathered wild gourds from it, his lap full,  came and shred them into the pot of pottage, for they did not know them.
Kgs. So they poured out for the men to eat. And it came to pass, as they were eating of the pottage, that they cried out,  said, O man of God, there is death in the pot. And they could not eat of it.
Kgs. But he said, Then bring meal. And he cast it into the pot,  he said, Pour out for the people, that they may eat. And there was no harm in the pot.
Kgs. And a man came from Baal-shalishah,  brought the man of God bread of the first-fruits, twenty loaves of barley,  fresh ears of grain in his sack. And he said, Give to the people that they may eat.
Kgs. And his servant said, What, should I set this before a hundred men? But he said, Give to the people that they may eat, for thus says Jehovah, They shall eat,  shall leave of it.
Kgs. So he set it before them,  they ate,  left of it according to the word of Jehovah.
Kgs. Now Naaman, captain of the army of the king of Syria, was a great man with his master,  honorable, because by him Jehovah had given victory to Syria. He was also a mighty man of valor,  he was a leper.
Kgs. And the Syrians had gone out in bands,  had brought away captive out of the land of Israel a little maiden,  she waited on Naaman's wife.
Kgs. And she said to her mistress, Would that my lord were with the prophet who is in Samaria! Then he would heal him of his leprosy.
Kgs. And a man went in,  told his lord, saying, Thus and thus said the maiden who is of the land of Israel.
Kgs. And the king of Syria said, Go now,  I will send a letter to the king of Israel. And he departed,  took with him ten talents of silver,  six thousand pieces of gold,  ten changes of raiment.
Kgs. And he brought the letter to the king of Israel, saying, And now when this letter has come to thee, behold, I have sent Naaman my servant to thee that thou may heal him of his leprosy.
Kgs. And it came to pass, when the king of Israel had read the letter, that he tore his clothes,  said, Am I God, to kill and to make alive, that this man sends to me to heal a man of his leprosy? But consider, I pray you,  see how he seeks a quarrel against me.
Kgs. And it was so, when Elisha the man of God heard that the king of Israel had torn his clothes, that he sent to the king, saying, Why have thou torn thy clothes? Let him come now to me,  he shall know that there is a prophet in Israel.
Kgs. So Naaman came with his horses and with his chariots,  stood at the door of the house of Elisha.
Kgs. And Elisha sent a messenger to him, saying, Go and wash in the Jordan seven times,  thy flesh shall come again to thee,  thou shall be clean.
Kgs. But Naaman was angry,  went away,  said, Behold, I thought he will surely come out to me,  stand,  call on the name of Jehovah his God,  wave his hand over the place,  heal the leper.
Kgs. Are not Abanah and Pharpar, the rivers of Damascus, better than all the waters of Israel? May I not wash in them,  be clean? So he turned and went away in a rage.
Kgs. And his servants came near,  spoke to him,  said, My father, if the prophet had bid thee do some great thing, would thou not have done it? How much rather then, when he says to thee, Wash,  be clean?
Kgs. Then went he down,  dipped himself seven times in the Jordan, according to the saying of the man of God. And his flesh came again like the flesh of a little child,  he was clean.
Kgs. And he returned to the man of God, he and all his company,  came,  stood before him. And he said, Behold, now I know that there is no God in all the earth,  in Israel. Now therefore, I pray thee, take a present from thy servant.
Kgs. But he said, As Jehovah lives, before whom I stand, I will receive none. And he urged him to take it,  he refused.
Kgs. And Naaman said, If not, yet, I pray thee, let there be given to thy servant two mules' burden of dirt, for thy servant will henceforth offer neither burnt offering nor sacrifice to other gods,  to Jehovah.
Kgs. In this thing Jehovah pardon thy servant: when my master goes into the house of Rimmon to worship there,  he leans on my hand,  I bow myself in the house of Rimmon, when I bow myself in the house of Rimmon, Jehovah pardon thy servant in this thing.
Kgs. And he said to him, Go in peace. So he departed from him a little way.
Kgs. But Gehazi the servant of Elisha the man of God, said, Behold, my master has spared this Naaman the Syrian, in not receiving at his hands that which he brought. As Jehovah lives, I will run after him,  take something from him.
Kgs. So Gehazi followed after Naaman. And when Naaman saw him running after him, he alighted from the chariot to meet him,  said, Is all well?
Kgs. And he said, All is well. My master has sent me, saying, Behold, even now there come to me from the hill-country of Ephraim two young men of the sons of the prophets. Give them, I pray thee, a talent of silver,  two changes of raiment.
Kgs. And Naaman said, Be pleased to take two talents. And he urged him,  bound two talents of silver in two bags, with two changes of raiment,  laid them upon two of his servants,  they bore them before him.
Kgs. And when he came to the hill, he took them from their hand,  bestowed them in the house,  he let the men go,  they departed.
Kgs. But he went in,  stood before his master. And Elisha said to him, From where did thou come, Gehazi? And he said, Thy servant went nowhere.
Kgs. And he said to him, Did not my heart go with thee when the man turned from his chariot to meet thee? Is it a time to receive money,  to receive garments,  oliveyards and vineyards,  sheep and oxen,  men-servants and maid-servants?
Kgs. The leprosy therefore of Naaman shall cling to thee,  to thy seed forever. And he went out from his presence a leper as white as snow.
Kgs. And the sons of the prophets said to Elisha, Behold now, the place where we dwell before thee is too confined for us.
Kgs. Let us go, we pray thee, to the Jordan,  every man take a beam from there,  let us make us a place there, where we may dwell. And he answered, Go ye.
Kgs. And one said, Be pleased, I pray thee, to go with thy servants. And he answered, I will go.
Kgs. So he went with them. And when they came to the Jordan, they cut down wood.
Kgs. But as one was felling a beam, the axe-head fell into the water. And he cried,  said, Alas, my master! For it was borrowed.
Kgs. And the man of God said, Where did it fall? And he showed him the place. And he cut down a stick,  cast it in there,  made the iron to float.
Kgs. And he said, Take it up to thee. So he put out his hand,  took it.
Kgs. Now the king of Syria was warring against Israel,  he took counsel with his servants, saying, In such and such a place shall be my camp.
Kgs. And the man of God sent to the king of Israel, saying, Beware that thou not pass such a place, for the Syrians are coming down there.
Kgs. And the king of Israel sent to the place which the man of God told him and warned him of. And he saved himself there, not once nor twice.
Kgs. And the heart of the king of Syria was greatly troubled for this thing,  he called his servants,  said to them, Will ye not show me which of us is for the king of Israel?
Kgs. And one of his servants said, No, my lord, O king,  Elisha, the prophet who is in Israel tells the king of Israel the words that thou speak in thy bedchamber.
Kgs. And he said, Go and see where he is that I may send and fetch him. And it was told him, saying, Behold, he is in Dothan.
Kgs. Therefore he sent there horses,  chariots,  a great army. And they came by night,  encompassed the city about.
Kgs. And when the servant of the man of God was risen early,  gone forth, behold, an army with horses and chariots was round about the city. And his servant said to him, Alas, my master! What shall we do?
Kgs. And he answered, Fear not, for those who are with us are more than those who are with them.
Kgs. And Elisha prayed,  said, Jehovah, I pray thee, open his eyes that he may see. And Jehovah opened the eyes of the young man,  he saw. And, behold, the mountain was full of horses and chariots of fire round about Elisha.
Kgs. And when they came down to him, Elisha prayed to Jehovah,  said, Smite this people, I pray thee, with blindness. And he smote them with blindness according to the word of Elisha.
Kgs. And Elisha said to them, This is not the way, neither is this the city. Follow me,  I will bring you to the man whom ye seek. And he led them to Samaria.
Kgs. And it came to pass, when they came into Samaria, that Elisha said, Jehovah, open the eyes of these men that they may see. And Jehovah opened their eyes,  they saw. And, behold, they were in the midst of Samaria.
Kgs. And the king of Israel said to Elisha, when he saw them, My father, shall I smite them? Shall I smite them?
Kgs. And he answered, Thou shall not smite them. Would thou smite those whom thou have taken captive with thy sword and with thy bow? Set bread and water before them that they may eat and drink,  go to their master.
Kgs. And he prepared great provision for them. And when they had eaten and drunk, he sent them away,  they went to their master. And the bands of Syria came no more into the land of Israel.
Kgs. And it came to pass after this, that Benhadad king of Syria gathered all his army,  went up,  besieged Samaria.
Kgs. And there was a great famine in Samaria. And, behold, they besieged it until a donkey's head was sold for eighty pieces of silver,  the fourth part of a kab of dove's dung for five pieces of silver.
Kgs. And as the king of Israel was passing by upon the wall, a woman cried out to him, saying, Help, my lord, O king.
Kgs. And he said, If Jehovah does not help thee, from where shall I help thee? Out of the threshing-floor, or out of the winepress?
Kgs. And the king said to her, What troubles thee? And she answered, This woman said to me, Give thy son that we may eat him today,  we will eat my son tomorrow.
Kgs. So we boiled my son,  ate him. And I said to her on the next day, Give thy son that we may eat him. And she has hid her son.
Kgs. And it came to pass, when the king heard the words of the woman, that he tore his clothes (now he was passing by upon the wall). And the people looked, , behold, he had sackcloth inside upon his flesh.
Kgs. Then he said, God do so to me,  more also, if the head of Elisha the son of Shaphat shall stand on him this day.
Kgs. But Elisha was sitting in his house,  the elders were sitting with him. And the king sent a man from before him,  before the messenger came to him, he said to the elders, Do ye see how this son of a murderer has sent to take away my head? Look, when the messenger comes, shut the door,  hold the door fast against him. Is not the sound of his master's feet behind him?
Kgs. And while he was yet talking with them, behold, the messenger came down to him,  he said, Behold, this evil is of Jehovah. Why should I wait for Jehovah any longer?
Kgs. And Elisha said, Hear ye the word of Jehovah. Thus says Jehovah, Tomorrow about this time a measure of fine flour shall be sold for a shekel,  two measures of barley for a shekel, in the gate of Samaria.
Kgs. Then the captain on whose hand the king leaned answered the man of God,  said, Behold, if Jehovah should make windows in heaven, might this thing be? And he said, Behold, thou shall see it with thine eyes,  shall not eat of it.
Kgs. Now there were four leprous men at the entrance of the gate,  they said one to another, Why do we sit here until we die?
Kgs. If we say, We will enter into the city, then the famine is in the city,  we shall die there. And if we sit still here, we die also. Now therefore come,  let us fall to the army of the Syrians. If they save us alive, we shall live,  if they kill us, we shall but die.
Kgs. And they rose up in the twilight, to go to the camp of the Syrians. And when they came to the outermost part of the camp of the Syrians, behold, there was no man there.
Kgs. For the Lord had made the army of the Syrians to hear a noise of chariots,  a noise of horses, even the noise of a great army. And they said one to another, Lo, the king of Israel has hired against us the kings of the Hittites,  the kings of the Egyptians, to come upon us.
Kgs. Therefore they arose and fled in the twilight,  left their tents,  their horses,  their donkeys, even the camp as it was,  fled for their life.
Kgs. And when these lepers came to the outermost part of the camp, they went into one tent,  ate and drank,  carried from there silver,  gold,  raiment,  went and hid it. And they came back,  entered into another tent,  carried from there also,  went and hid it.
Kgs. Then they said one to another, We are not doing right. This day is a day of good news,  we keep silent. If we delay till the morning light, punishment will overtake us. Now therefore come, let us go and tell the king's household.
Kgs. So they came and called to the porter of the city. And they told them, saying, We came to the camp of the Syrians, , behold, there was no man there, neither voice of man,  the horses tied,  the donkeys tied,  the tents as they were.
Kgs. And he called the porters,  they told it to the king's household within.
Kgs. And the king arose in the night,  said to his servants, I will now show you what the Syrians have done to us. They know that we are hungry. Therefore they have gone out of the camp to hide themselves in the field, saying, When they come out of the city we shall take them alive,  get into the city.
Kgs. And one of his servants answered and said, Let, I pray thee, some men take five of the horses that remain, which are left in the city (behold, they are as all the multitude of Israel that are left in it; behold, they are as all the multitude of Israel that are consumed),  let us send and see.
Kgs. Therefore they took two chariots with horses. And the king sent after the army of the Syrians, saying, Go and see.
Kgs. And they went after them to the Jordan. And, lo, all the way was full of garments and vessels, which the Syrians had cast away in their haste. And the messengers returned,  told the king.
Kgs. And the people went out,  plundered the camp of the Syrians. So a measure of fine flour was sold for a shekel,  two measures of barley for a shekel, according to the word of Jehovah.
Kgs. And the king appointed the captain on whose hand he leaned to have the charge of the gate. And the people trampled upon him in the gate,  he died as the man of God had said, who spoke when the king came down to him.
Kgs. And it came to pass, as the man of God had spoken to the king, saying, Two measures of barley for a shekel,  a measure of fine flour for a shekel, shall be tomorrow about this time in the gate of Samaria.
Kgs. And that captain answered the man of God,  said, Now, behold, if Jehovah should make windows in heaven, might such a thing be? And he said, Behold, thou shall see it with thine eyes,  shall not eat of it.
Kgs. It came to pass even so to him, for the people trampled upon him in the gate,  he died.
Kgs. Now Elisha had spoken to the woman, whose son he had restored to life, saying, Arise,  go thou and thy household,  sojourn wherever thou can sojourn, for Jehovah has called for a famine,  it shall also come upon the land seven years.
Kgs. And the woman arose,  did according to the word of the man of God. And she went with her household,  sojourned in the land of the Philistines seven years.
Kgs. And it came to pass at the end of seven years, that the woman returned out of the land of the Philistines,  she went forth to cry to the king for her house and for her land.
Kgs. Now the king was talking with Gehazi the servant of the man of God, saying, Tell me, I pray thee, all the great things that Elisha has done.
Kgs. And it came to pass, as he was telling the king how he had restored to life him who was dead, that, behold, the woman, whose son he had restored to life, cried to the king for her house and for her land. And Gehazi said, My lord, O king, this is the woman,  this is her son whom Elisha restored to life.
Kgs. And when the king asked the woman, she told him. So the king appointed to her a certain officer, saying, Restore all that was hers,  all the fruits of the field since the day that she left the land, even until now.
Kgs. And Elisha came to Damascus,  Benhadad the king of Syria was sick. And it was told him, saying, The man of God has come here.
Kgs. And the king said to Hazael, Take a present in thy hand,  go, meet the man of God,  inquire of Jehovah by him, saying, Shall I recover of this sickness?
Kgs. So Hazael went to meet him,  took a present with him, even of every good thing of Damascus, forty camels' burden,  came and stood before him,  said, Thy son Benhadad king of Syria has sent me to thee, saying, Shall I recover of this sickness?
Kgs. And Elisha said to him, Go, say to him, Thou shall surely recover. However Jehovah has shown me that he shall surely die.
Kgs. And he settled his countenance steadfastly upon him, until he was ashamed. And the man of God wept.
Kgs. And Hazael said, Why do thou weep my lord? And he answered, Because I know the evil that thou will do to the sons of Israel: their strongholds thou will set on fire,  their young men thou will kill with the sword,  will dash in pieces their little ones,  rip up their women with child.
Kgs. And Hazael said, But what is thy servant, who is but a dog, that he should do this great thing? And Elisha answered, Jehovah has shown me that thou shall be king over Syria.
Kgs. Then he departed from Elisha,  came to his master, who said to him, What did Elisha say to thee? And he answered, He told me that thou would surely recover.
Kgs. And it came to pass on the morrow, that he took the coverlet,  dipped it in water,  spread it on his face, so that he died. And Hazael reigned in his stead.
Kgs. And in the fifth year of Joram the son of Ahab king of Israel, Jehoshaphat being then king of Judah, Jehoram the son of Jehoshaphat king of Judah began to reign.
Kgs. He was thirty-two years old when he began to reign,  he reigned eight years in Jerusalem.
Kgs. And he walked in the way of the kings of Israel, as did the house of Ahab, for he had the daughter of Ahab to wife. And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah.
Kgs. However Jehovah would not destroy Judah, for David his servant's sake, as he promised him to give to him a lamp for his sons always.
Kgs. In his days Edom revolted from under the hand of Judah,  made a king over themselves.
Kgs. Then Joram passed over to Zair,  all his chariots with him. And he rose up by night,  smote the Edomites that encompassed him about,  the captains of the chariots. And the people fled to their tents.
Kgs. So Edom revolted from under the hand of Judah to this day. Then Libnah revolted at the same time.
Kgs. And the rest of the acts of Joram,  all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
Kgs. And Joram slept with his fathers,  was buried with his fathers in the city of David,  Ahaziah his son reigned in his stead.
Kgs. In the twelfth year of Joram the son of Ahab king of Israel, Ahaziah the son of Jehoram king of Judah began to reign.
Kgs. Ahaziah was twenty-two years old when he began to reign,  he reigned one year in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Athaliah the daughter of Omri king of Israel.
Kgs. And he walked in the way of the house of Ahab,  did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah, as did the house of Ahab, for he was the son-in-law of the house of Ahab.
Kgs. And he went with Joram the son of Ahab to war against Hazael king of Syria at Ramoth-gilead,  the Syrians wounded Joram.
Kgs. And king Joram returned to be healed in Jezreel of the wounds which the Syrians had given him at Ramah when he fought against Hazael king of Syria. And Ahaziah the son of Jehoram king of Judah went down to see Joram the son of Ahab in Jezreel, because he was sick.
Kgs. And Elisha the prophet called one of the sons of the prophets,  said to him, Gird up thy loins,  take this vial of oil in thy hand,  go to Ramoth-gilead.
Kgs. And when thou come there, look out there for Jehu the son of Jehoshaphat the son of Nimshi,  go in,  make him arise up from among his brothers,  carry him to an inner chamber.
Kgs. Then take the vial of oil,  pour it on his head,  say, Thus says Jehovah, I have anointed thee king over Israel. Then open the door,  flee,  delay not.
Kgs. So the young man, even the young man the prophet, went to Ramoth-gilead.
Kgs. And when he came, behold, the captains of the army were sitting. And he said, I have an errand to thee, O captain. And Jehu said, To which of us all? And he said, To thee, O captain.
Kgs. And he arose,  went into the house. And he poured the oil on his head,  said to him, Thus says Jehovah, the God of Israel, I have anointed thee king over the people of Jehovah, even over Israel.
Kgs. And thou shall smite the house of Ahab thy master, that I may avenge the blood of my servants the prophets,  the blood of all the servants of Jehovah, at the hand of Jezebel.
Kgs. For the whole house of Ahab shall perish. And I will cut off from Ahab every man-child,  him who is shut up and him who is left at large in Israel.
Kgs. And I will make the house of Ahab like the house of Jeroboam the son of Nebat,  like the house of Baasha the son of Ahijah.
Kgs. And the dogs shall eat Jezebel in the portion of Jezreel,  there shall be none to bury her. And he opened the door,  fled.
Kgs. Then Jehu came forth to the servants of his lord,  one said to him, Is all well? Why did this mad fellow come to thee? And he said to them, Ye know the man and what his talk was.
Kgs. And they said, It is not true; tell us now. And he said, Thus and thus he spoke to me, saying, Thus says Jehovah, I have anointed thee king over Israel.
Kgs. Then they hastened,  every man took his garment,  put it under him on the top of the stairs,  blew the trumpet, saying, Jehu is king.
Kgs. So Jehu the son of Jehoshaphat the son of Nimshi conspired against Joram. (Now Joram was keeping Ramoth-gilead, he and all Israel, because of Hazael king of Syria.
Kgs. But king Joram was returned to be healed in Jezreel of the wounds which the Syrians had given him when he fought with Hazael king of Syria.) And Jehu said, If this be your mind, then let none escape and go forth out of the city to go to tell it in Jezreel.
Kgs. So Jehu rode in a chariot,  went to Jezreel, for Joram lay there. And Ahaziah king of Judah came down to see Joram.
Kgs. Now the watchman was standing on the tower in Jezreel,  he spied the company of Jehu as he came,  said, I see a company. And Joram said, Take a horseman,  send to meet them,  let him say, Is it peace?
Kgs. So one went on horseback to meet him,  said, Thus says the king, Is it peace? And Jehu said, What have thou to do with peace? Turn thee behind me. And the watchman told, saying, The messenger came to them,  he does not come back.
Kgs. Then he sent out a second on horseback who came to them,  said, Thus says the king, Is it peace? And Jehu answered, What have thou to do with peace? Turn thee behind me.
Kgs. And the watchman told, saying, He came to them,  does not come back. And the driving is like the driving of Jehu the son of Nimshi, for he drives furiously.
Kgs. And Joram said, Make ready. And they made his chariot ready. And Joram king of Israel and Ahaziah king of Judah went out, each in his chariot,  they went out to meet Jehu,  found him in the portion of Naboth the Jezreelite.
Kgs. And it came to pass, when Joram saw Jehu, that he said, Is it peace, Jehu? And he answered, What peace, so long as the whoredoms of thy mother Jezebel and her witchcrafts are so many?
Kgs. And Joram turned his hands,  fled,  said to Ahaziah, There is treachery, O Ahaziah.
Kgs. And Jehu drew his bow with his full strength,  smote Joram between his arms. And the arrow went out at his heart,  he sank down in his chariot.
Kgs. Then Jehu said to Bidkar his captain, Take up,  cast him in the portion of the field of Naboth the Jezreelite. For remember how that, when I and thou rode together after Ahab his father, Jehovah laid this burden upon him:
Kgs. Surely I have seen yesterday the blood of Naboth,  the blood of his sons, says Jehovah,  I will requite thee in this plot, says Jehovah. Now therefore take and cast him into the plot of ground, according to the word of Jehovah.
Kgs. But when Ahaziah the king of Judah saw this, he fled by the way of the garden-house. And Jehu followed after him,  said, Smite him also in the chariot. And they smote him at the ascent of Gur, which is by Ibleam. And he fled to Megiddo,  died there.
Kgs. And his servants carried him in a chariot to Jerusalem,  buried him in his sepulcher with his fathers in the city of David.
Kgs. (And it was in the eleventh year of Joram the son of Ahab Ahaziah began to reign over Judah.)
Kgs. And when Jehu came to Jezreel, Jezebel heard of it. And she painted her eyes,  attired her head,  looked out at the window.
Kgs. And as Jehu entered in at the gate, she said, Is it peace, thou Zimri, thy master's murderer?
Kgs. And he lifted up his face to the window,  said, Who is on my side? Who? And two or three eunuchs looked out to him.
Kgs. And he said, Throw her down. So they threw her down. And some of her blood was sprinkled on the wall,  on the horses. And he trampled her under foot.
Kgs. And when he came in, he ate and drank,  he said, Now see to this cursed woman,  bury her, for she is a king's daughter.
Kgs. And they went to bury her,  they found no more of her than the skull,  the feet,  the palms of her hands.
Kgs. Therefore they came back,  told him. And he said, This is the word of Jehovah, which he spoke by his servant Elijah the Tishbite, saying, In the portion of Jezreel shall the dogs eat the flesh of Jezebel,
Kgs. and the body of Jezebel shall be as dung upon the face of the field in the portion of Jezreel, so that they shall not say, This is Jezebel.
Kgs. Now Ahab had seventy sons in Samaria. And Jehu wrote letters,  sent to Samaria, to the rulers of Jezreel, even the elders,  to those who brought up the sons of Ahab, saying,
Kgs. And now as soon as this letter comes to you, seeing your master's sons are with you,  there are with you chariots and horses, also a fortified city,  armor,
Kgs. look ye out for the best and fittest of your master's sons,  set him on his father's throne,  fight for your master's house.
Kgs. But they were exceedingly afraid,  said, Behold, the two kings did not stand before him. How then shall we stand?
Kgs. And he who was over the household,  he who was over the city, the elders also,  those who brought up the sons, sent to Jehu, saying, We are thy servants,  will do all that thou shall bid us. We will not make any man king. Do thou that which is good in thine eyes.
Kgs. Then he wrote a letter the second time to them, saying, If ye be on my side,  if ye will hearken to my voice, take ye the heads of the men your master's sons,  come to me to Jezreel by tomorrow this time. Now the king's sons, being seventy persons, were with the great men of the city who reared them.
Kgs. And it came to pass, when the letter came to them, that they took the king's sons,  killed them, even seventy persons,  put their heads in baskets,  sent them to him to Jezreel.
Kgs. And a messenger came,  told him, saying, They have brought the heads of the king's sons. And he said, Lay ye them in two heaps at the entrance of the gate until the morning.
Kgs. And it came to pass in the morning, that he went out,  stood,  said to all the people, Ye are righteous. Behold, I conspired against my master,  killed him. But who smote all these?
Kgs. Know now that there shall fall to the earth nothing of the word of Jehovah, which Jehovah spoke concerning the house of Ahab, for Jehovah has done that which he spoke by his servant Elijah.
Kgs. So Jehu smote all who remained of the house of Ahab in Jezreel,  all his great men,  his familiar friends,  his priests, until he left to him none remaining.
Kgs. And he arose and departed,  went to Samaria. And as he was at the shearing-house of the shepherds in the way,
Kgs. Jehu met with the brothers of Ahaziah king of Judah,  said, Who are ye? And they answered, We are the brothers of Ahaziah,  we go down to salute the sons of the king and the sons of the queen.
Kgs. And he said, Take them alive. And they took them alive,  killed them at the pit of the shearing-house, even forty-two men; neither did he leave any of them.
Kgs. And when he was departed from there, he came upon on Jehonadab the son of Rechab coming to meet him. And he saluted him,  said to him, Is thy heart right, as my heart is with thy heart? And Jehonadab answered, It is. If it be, give me thy hand. And he gave him his hand,  he took him up to him into the chariot.
Kgs. And he said, Come with me,  see my zeal for Jehovah. So they made him ride in his chariot.
Kgs. And when he came to Samaria, he smote all who remained to Ahab in Samaria, till he had destroyed him, according to the word of Jehovah, which he spoke to Elijah.
Kgs. And Jehu gathered all the people together,  said to them, Ahab served Baal a little,  Jehu will serve him much.
Kgs. Now therefore call to me all the prophets of Baal, all his worshippers,  all his priests. Let none be lacking, for I have a great sacrifice to do to Baal. Whoever shall be lacking, he shall not live. But Jehu did it in subtlety, to the intent that he might destroy the worshippers of Baal.
Kgs. And Jehu said, Sanctify a solemn assembly for Baal. And they proclaimed it.
Kgs. And Jehu sent through all Israel. And all the worshippers of Baal came, so that there was not a man left who did not come. And they came into the house of Baal,  the house of Baal was filled from one end to another.
Kgs. And he said to him who was over the vestry, Bring forth vestments for all the worshippers of Baal. And he brought forth for them vestments.
Kgs. And Jehu went,  Jehonadab the son of Rechab, into the house of Baal. And he said to the worshippers of Baal, Search,  look that there be here with you none of the servants of Jehovah,  the worshippers of Baal only.
Kgs. And they went in to offer sacrifices and burnt offerings. Now Jehu had appointed for him eighty men outside,  said, If any of the men whom I bring into your hands escape, he who lets him go, his life shall be for the life of him.
Kgs. And it came to pass, as soon as he had made an end of offering the burnt offering, that Jehu said to the guard and to the captains, Go in,  kill them; let none come forth. And they smote them with the edge of the sword. And the guard and the captains cast them out,  went to the city of the house of Baal.
Kgs. And they brought forth the pillars that were in the house of Baal,  burned them.
Kgs. And they broke down the pillar of Baal,  broke down the house of Baal,  made it an out-house to this day.
Kgs. Thus Jehu destroyed Baal out of Israel.
Kgs. However from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, with which he made Israel to sin, Jehu did not depart from after them, namely, the golden calves that were in Bethel,  that were in Dan.
Kgs. And Jehovah said to Jehu, Because thou have done well in executing that which is right in my eyes,  have done to the house of Ahab according to all that was in my heart, thy sons of the fourth generation shall sit on the throne of Israel.
Kgs. But Jehu did not take heed to walk in the law of Jehovah, the God of Israel, with all his heart. He did not depart from the sins of Jeroboam, with which he made Israel to sin.
Kgs. In those days Jehovah began to cut off from Israel. And Hazael smote them in all the borders of Israel,
Kgs. from the Jordan eastward, all the land of Gilead, the Gadites,  the Reubenites,  the Manassites, from Aroer, which is by the valley of the Arnon, even Gilead and Bashan.
Kgs. Now the rest of the acts of Jehu,  all that he did,  all his might, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
Kgs. And Jehu slept with his fathers,  they buried him in Samaria. And Jehoahaz his son reigned in his stead.
Kgs. And the time that Jehu reigned over Israel in Samaria was twenty-eight years.
Kgs. Now when Athaliah the mother of Ahaziah saw that her son was dead, she arose and destroyed all the royal seed.
Kgs. But Jehosheba, the daughter of king Joram, sister of Ahaziah, took Joash the son of Ahaziah,  stole him away from among the king's sons who were slain, even him and his nurse,  put them in the bedchamber. And they hid him from Athaliah, so that he was not slain.
Kgs. And he was with her hidden in the house of Jehovah six years. And Athaliah reigned over the land.
Kgs. And in the seventh year Jehoiada sent and fetched the captains over hundreds of the Carites and of the guard,  brought them to him into the house of Jehovah. And he made a covenant with them,  took an oath of them in the house of Jehovah,  showed them the king's son.
Kgs. And he commanded them, saying, This is the thing that ye shall do: a third part of you, who come in on the sabbath, shall be keepers of the watch of the king's house;
Kgs. and a third part shall be at the gate Sur; and a third part at the gate behind the guard. So shall ye keep the watch of the house,  be a barrier.
Kgs. And the two companies of you, even all who go forth on the sabbath, shall keep the watch of the house of Jehovah around the king.
Kgs. And ye shall encompass the king round about, every man with his weapons in his hand. And he who comes within the ranks, let him be slain. And be ye with the king when he goes out,  when he comes in.
Kgs. And the captains over hundreds did according to all that Jehoiada the priest commanded. And every man took his men, those who were to come in on the sabbath, with those who were to go out on the sabbath,  came to Jehoiada the priest.
Kgs. And the priest delivered to the captains over hundreds the spears and shields that had been king David's, which were in the house of Jehovah.
Kgs. And the guard stood, every man with his weapons in his hand, from the right side of the house to the left side of the house, along by the altar and the house, by the king round about.
Kgs. Then he brought out the king's son,  put the crown upon him,  gave him the testimony. And they made him king,  anointed him. And they clapped their hands,  said, Live, O king.
Kgs. And when Athaliah heard the noise of the guard and of the people, she came to the people into the house of Jehovah.
Kgs. And she looked, , behold, the king stood by the pillar, as the manner was,  the captains and the trumpets by the king. And all the people of the land rejoiced,  blew trumpets. Then Athaliah tore her clothes,  cried, Treason! treason!
Kgs. And Jehoiada the priest commanded the captains of hundreds who were set over the army,  said to them, Have her forth between the ranks,  kill with the sword the man who follows her. For the priest said, Let her not be slain in the house of Jehovah.
Kgs. So they made way for her. And she went by the way of the horses' entry to the king's house,  there was she slain.
Kgs. And Jehoiada made a covenant between Jehovah and the king and the people, that they should be Jehovah's people; between the king also and the people.
Kgs. And all the people of the land went to the house of Baal,  broke it down. They broke in pieces his altars and his images thoroughly,  killed Mattan the priest of Baal before the altars. And the priest appointed officers over the house of Jehovah.
Kgs. And he took the captains over hundreds,  the Carites,  the guard,  all the people of the land,  they brought down the king from the house of Jehovah,  came by the way of the gate of the guard to the king's house. And he sat on the throne of the kings.
Kgs. So all the people of the land rejoiced,  the city was quiet. And they had slain Athaliah with the sword at the king's house.
Kgs. Joash was seven years old when he began to reign.
Kgs. Joash began to reign in the seventh year of Jehu. And he reigned forty years in Jerusalem,  his mother's name was Zibiah of Beersheba.
Kgs. And Joash did that which was right in the eyes of Jehovah all his days in which Jehoiada the priest instructed him.
Kgs. However the high places were not taken away; the people still sacrificed and burnt incense in the high places.
Kgs. And Joash said to the priests, All the money of the hallowed things that is brought into the house of Jehovah, in current money, the money of the persons for whom each man is rated,  all the money that it comes into any man's heart to bring into the house of Jehovah,
Kgs. let the priests take it to them, every man from his acquaintance,  they shall repair the broken parts of the house wherever any breach shall be found.
Kgs. But it was so, that in the twenty-third year of king Joash the priests had not repaired the broken parts of the house.
Kgs. Then king Joash called for Jehoiada the priest,  for the other priests,  said to them, Why do ye not repair the broken parts of the house? Now therefore take no more money from your acquaintance,  deliver it for the broken parts of the house.
Kgs. And the priests consented that they should take no more money from the people, neither repair the broken parts of the house.
Kgs. But Jehoiada the priest took a chest,  bored a hole in the lid of it,  set it beside the altar, on the right side as a man comes into the house of Jehovah. And the priests who kept the threshold put in it all the money that was brought into the house of Jehovah.
Kgs. And it was so, when they saw that there was much money in the chest, that the king's scribe and the high priest came up,  they put up in bags and counted the money that was found in the house of Jehovah.
Kgs. And they gave the money that was weighed out into the hands of those who did the work, who had the oversight of the house of Jehovah. And they paid it out to the carpenters and the builders who worked upon the house of Jehovah,
Kgs. and to the masons and the hewers of stone,  for buying timber and hewn stone to repair the broken parts of the house of Jehovah,  for all that was laid out for the house to repair it.
Kgs. But there were not made for the house of Jehovah cups of silver, snuffers, basins, trumpets, any vessels of gold, or vessels of silver, of the money that was brought into the house of Jehovah,
Kgs. for they gave that to those who did the work,  with it repaired the house of Jehovah.
Kgs. Moreover they did not reckon with the men into whose hand they delivered the money to give to those who did the work, for they dealt faithfully.
Kgs. The money for the trespass offerings,  the money for the sin offerings, was not brought into the house of Jehovah; it was the priests'.
Kgs. Then Hazael king of Syria went up,  fought against Gath,  took it. And Hazael set his face to go up to Jerusalem.
Kgs. And Joash king of Judah took all the hallowed things that Jehoshaphat and Jehoram and Ahaziah, his fathers, kings of Judah, had dedicated,  his own hallowed things,  all the gold that was found in the treasures of the house of Jehovah,  of the king's house,  sent it to Hazael king of Syria. And he went away from Jerusalem.
Kgs. Now the rest of the acts of Joash,  all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
Kgs. And his servants arose,  made a conspiracy,  smote Joash at the house of Millo, on the way that goes down to Silla.
Kgs. For Jozacar the son of Shimeath,  Jehozabad the son of Shomer, his servants, smote him,  he died. And they buried him with his fathers in the city of David. And Amaziah his son reigned in his stead.
Kgs. In the twenty-third year of Joash the son of Ahaziah, king of Judah, Jehoahaz the son of Jehu began to reign over Israel in Samaria,  reigned seventeen years.
Kgs. And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah,  followed the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, with which he made Israel to sin. He did not depart from it.
Kgs. And the anger of Jehovah was kindled against Israel,  he delivered them into the hand of Hazael king of Syria,  into the hand of Benhadad the son of Hazael, continually.
Kgs. And Jehoahaz besought Jehovah,  Jehovah hearkened to him, for he saw the oppression of Israel, how that the king of Syria oppressed them.
Kgs. (And Jehovah gave Israel a savior, so that they went out from under the hand of the Syrians,  the sons of Israel dwelt in their tents as beforetime.
Kgs. Nevertheless they did not depart from the sins of the house of Jeroboam, with which he made Israel to sin,  walked therein. And the Asherah also remained in Samaria.)
Kgs. For he did not leave to Jehoahaz of the people except fifty horsemen,  ten chariots,  ten thousand footmen, for the king of Syria destroyed them,  made them like the dust in threshing.
Kgs. Now the rest of the acts of Jehoahaz,  all that he did,  his might, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
Kgs. And Jehoahaz slept with his fathers,  they buried him in Samaria. And Joash his son reigned in his stead.
Kgs. In the thirty-seventh year of Joash king of Judah, Jehoash the son of Jehoahaz began to reign over Israel in Samaria,  reigned sixteen years.
Kgs. And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah. He did not depart from all the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, with which he made Israel to sin,  he walked therein.
Kgs. Now the rest of the acts of Joash,  all that he did,  his might with which he fought against Amaziah king of Judah, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
Kgs. And Joash slept with his fathers,  Jeroboam sat upon his throne. And Joash was buried in Samaria with the kings of Israel.
Kgs. Now Elisha was fallen sick of his sickness of which he died. And Joash the king of Israel came down to him,  wept over him,  said, My father, my father, the chariots of Israel and the horsemen of it!
Kgs. And Elisha said to him, Take bow and arrows. And he took to him bow and arrows.
Kgs. And he said to the king of Israel, Put thy hand upon the bow. And he put his hand upon it. And Elisha laid his hands upon the king's hands.
Kgs. And he said, Open the window eastward. And he opened it. Then Elisha said, Shoot. And he shot. And he said, Jehovah's arrow of victory, even the arrow of victory over Syria, for thou shall smite the Syrians in Aphek till thou have consumed them.
Kgs. And he said, Take the arrows. And he took them. And he said to the king of Israel, Smite upon the ground. And he smote thrice,  stopped.
Kgs. And the man of God was angry with him,  said, Thou should have smitten five or six times. Then thou would have smitten Syria till thou had consumed it, whereas now thou shall smite Syria but thrice.
Kgs. And Elisha died,  they buried him. Now the bands of the Moabites invaded the land at the coming in of the year.
Kgs. And it came to pass, as they were burying a man, that, behold, they spied a band,  they cast the man into the sepulcher of Elisha. And as soon as the man touched the bones of Elisha, he revived,  stood up on his feet.
Kgs. And Hazael king of Syria oppressed Israel all the days of Jehoahaz.
Kgs. But Jehovah was gracious to them,  had compassion on them,  had respect to them, because of his covenant with Abraham, Isaac,  Jacob,  would not destroy them, neither did he cast them from his presence as yet.
Kgs. And Hazael king of Syria died,  Benhadad his son reigned in his stead.
Kgs. And Jehoash the son of Jehoahaz again took out of the hand of Benhadad the son of Hazael the cities, which he had taken out of the hand of Jehoahaz his father by war. Three times Joash smote him,  recovered the cities of Israel.
Kgs. In the second year of Joash son of Joahaz king of Israel, Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah began to reign.
Kgs. He was twenty-five years old when he began to reign,  he reigned twenty-nine years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Jehoaddin of Jerusalem.
Kgs. And he did that which was right in the eyes of Jehovah, yet not like David his father. He did according to all that Joash his father had done.
Kgs. However the high places were not taken away; the people still sacrificed and burnt incense in the high places.
Kgs. And it came to pass, as soon as the kingdom was established in his hand, that he killed his servants who had slain the king his father,
Kgs. but he did not put to death the sons of the murderers, according to that which is written in the book of the law of Moses, as Jehovah commanded, saying, The fathers shall not be put to death for the sons, nor the sons be put to death for the fathers,  every man shall die for his own sin.
Kgs. He killed ten thousand of Edom in the Valley of Salt,  took Sela by war,  called the name of it Joktheel, to this day.
Kgs. Then Amaziah sent messengers to Jehoash, the son of Jehoahaz son of Jehu, king of Israel, saying, Come, let us look each other in the face.
Kgs. And Jehoash the king of Israel sent to Amaziah king of Judah, saying, The thistle that was in Lebanon sent to the cedar that was in Lebanon, saying, Give thy daughter to my son to wife. And a wild beast that was in Lebanon passed by,  trampled the thistle.
Kgs. Thou have indeed smitten Edom,  thy heart has lifted thee up. Glory by it,  abide at home, for why should thou meddle to thy hurt, that thou should fall, even thou,  Judah with thee?
Kgs. But Amaziah would not hear. So Jehoash king of Israel went up. And he and Amaziah king of Judah looked each other in the face at Beth-shemesh, which belongs to Judah.
Kgs. And Judah was put to the worse before Israel,  they fled every man to his tent.
Kgs. And Jehoash king of Israel took Amaziah king of Judah, the son of Jehoash the son of Ahaziah, at Beth-shemesh,  came to Jerusalem,  broke down the wall of Jerusalem from the gate of Ephraim to the corner gate, four hundred cubits.
Kgs. And he took all the gold and silver,  all the vessels that were found in the house of Jehovah,  in the treasures of the king's house, the hostages also,  returned to Samaria.
Kgs. Now the rest of the acts of Jehoash which he did,  his might,  how he fought with Amaziah king of Judah, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
Kgs. And Jehoash slept with his fathers,  was buried in Samaria with the kings of Israel. And Jeroboam his son reigned in his stead.
Kgs. And Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah lived fifteen years after the death of Jehoash son of Jehoahaz king of Israel.
Kgs. Now the rest of the acts of Amaziah, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
Kgs. And they made a conspiracy against him in Jerusalem. And he fled to Lachish. But they sent after him to Lachish,  killed him there.
Kgs. And they brought him upon horses,  he was buried at Jerusalem with his fathers in the city of David.
Kgs. And all the people of Judah took Azariah, who was sixteen years old,  made him king in the place of his father Amaziah.
Kgs. He built Elath,  restored it to Judah, after the king slept with his fathers.
Kgs. In the fifteenth year of Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah, Jeroboam the son of Joash king of Israel began to reign in Samaria,  reigned forty-one years.
Kgs. And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah. He did not depart from all the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, with which he made Israel to sin.
Kgs. He restored the border of Israel from the entrance of Hamath to the sea of the Arabah, according to the word of Jehovah, the God of Israel, which he spoke by his servant Jonah the son of Amittai, the prophet, who was of Gath-hepher.
Kgs. For Jehovah saw the affliction of Israel, that it was very bitter, for there was none shut up nor left at large, neither was there any helper for Israel.
Kgs. And Jehovah did not say that he would blot out the name of Israel from under heaven,  he saved them by the hand of Jeroboam the son of Joash.
Kgs. Now the rest of the acts of Jeroboam,  all that he did,  his might, how he warred,  how he recovered Damascus,  Hamath, which had belonged to Judah, for Israel, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
Kgs. And Jeroboam slept with his fathers, even with the kings of Israel,  Zechariah his son reigned in his stead.
Kgs. In the twenty-seventh year of Jeroboam king of Israel, Azariah son of Amaziah king of Judah began to reign.
Kgs. He was sixteen years old when he began to reign,  he reigned fifty-two years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Jecoliah of Jerusalem.
Kgs. And he did that which was right in the eyes of Jehovah, according to all that his father Amaziah had done.
Kgs. However the high places were not taken away; the people still sacrificed and burnt incense in the high places.
Kgs. And Jehovah smote the king, so that he was a leper to the day of his death,  dwelt in a separate house. And Jotham the king's son was over the household, judging the people of the land.
Kgs. Now the rest of the acts of Azariah,  all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
Kgs. And Azariah slept with his fathers,  they buried him with his fathers in the city of David. And Jotham his son reigned in his stead.
Kgs. In the thirty-eighth year of Azariah king of Judah, Zechariah the son of Jeroboam reigned over Israel in Samaria six months.
Kgs. And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah, as his fathers had done. He did not depart from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, with which he made Israel to sin.
Kgs. And Shallum the son of Jabesh conspired against him,  smote him before the people,  killed him,  reigned in his stead.
Kgs. Now the rest of the acts of Zechariah, behold, they are written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel.
Kgs. This was the word of Jehovah which he spoke to Jehu, saying, Thy sons to the fourth generation shall sit upon the throne of Israel. And so it came to pass.
Kgs. Shallum the son of Jabesh began to reign in the thirty-ninth year of Uzziah king of Judah,  he reigned the space of a month in Samaria.
Kgs. And Menahem the son of Gadi went up from Tirzah,  came to Samaria,  smote Shallum the son of Jabesh in Samaria,  killed him,  reigned in his stead.
Kgs. Now the rest of the acts of Shallum,  his conspiracy which he made, behold, they are written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel.
Kgs. Then Menahem smote Tiphsah,  all that were therein,  the borders of it, from Tirzah, because they did not open to him, therefore he smote it. And all the women in it who were with child he ripped up.
Kgs. In the thirty-ninth year of Azariah king of Judah, Menahem the son of Gadi began to reign over Israel,  reigned ten years in Samaria.
Kgs. And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah. He did not depart all his days from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, with which he made Israel to sin.
Kgs. Pul the king of Assyria came against the land. And Menahem gave Pul a thousand talents of silver that his hand might be with him to confirm the kingdom in his hand.
Kgs. And Menahem exacted the money from Israel, even of all the mighty men of wealth, of each man fifty shekels of silver, to give to the king of Assyria. So the king of Assyria turned back,  did not stay there in the land.
Kgs. Now the rest of the acts of Menahem,  all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
Kgs. And Menahem slept with his fathers,  Pekahiah his son reigned in his stead.
Kgs. In the fiftieth year of Azariah king of Judah, Pekahiah the son of Menahem began to reign over Israel in Samaria,  reigned two years.
Kgs. And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah. He did not depart from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, with which he made Israel to sin.
Kgs. And Pekah the son of Remaliah, his captain, conspired against him,  smote him in Samaria, in the castle of the king's house, with Argob and Arieh. And fifty men of the Gileadites with him were there. And he killed him,  reigned in his stead.
Kgs. Now the rest of the acts of Pekahiah,  all that he did, behold, they are written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel.
Kgs. In the fifty-second year of Azariah king of Judah, Pekah the son of Remaliah began to reign over Israel in Samaria,  reigned twenty years.
Kgs. And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah. He did not depart from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, with which he made Israel to sin.
Kgs. In the days of Pekah king of Israel, Tiglath-pileser king of Assyria came,  took Ijon,  Abel-beth-maacah,  Janoah,  Kedesh,  Hazor,  Gilead,  Galilee, all the land of Naphtali. And he carried them captive to Assyria.
Kgs. And Hoshea the son of Elah made a conspiracy against Pekah the son of Remaliah,  smote him,  killed him,  reigned in his stead in the twentieth year of Jotham the son of Uzziah.
Kgs. Now the rest of the acts of Pekah,  all that he did, behold, they are written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel.
Kgs. In the second year of Pekah the son of Remaliah king of Israel, Jotham the son of Uzziah king of Judah began to reign.
Kgs. He was twenty-five years old when he began to reign,  he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Jerusha the daughter of Zadok.
Kgs. And he did that which was right in the eyes of Jehovah. He did according to all that his father Uzziah had done.
Kgs. However the high places were not taken away. The people still sacrificed and burned incense in the high places. He built the upper gate of the house of Jehovah.
Kgs. Now the rest of the acts of Jotham,  all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
Kgs. In those days Jehovah began to send against Judah Rezin the king of Syria,  Pekah the son of Remaliah.
Kgs. And Jotham slept with his fathers,  was buried with his fathers in the city of David his father. And Ahaz his son reigned in his stead.
Kgs. In the seventeenth year of Pekah the son of Remaliah, Ahaz the son of Jotham king of Judah began to reign.
Kgs. Ahaz was twenty years old when he began to reign,  he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem. And he did not do that which was right in the eyes of Jehovah his God, like David his father.
Kgs. But he walked in the way of the kings of Israel. Yes,  made his son to pass through the fire, according to the abominations of the nations whom Jehovah cast out from before the sons of Israel.
Kgs. And he sacrificed and burnt incense in the high places,  on the hills,  under every green tree.
Kgs. Then Rezin king of Syria and Pekah son of Remaliah king of Israel came up to Jerusalem to war,  they besieged Ahaz,  could not overcome him.
Kgs. At that time Rezin king of Syria recovered Elath to Syria,  drove the Jews from Elath. And the Syrians came to Elath,  dwelt there to this day.
Kgs. So Ahaz sent messengers to Tiglath-pileser king of Assyria, saying, I am thy servant and thy son. Come up,  save me out of the hand of the king of Syria,  out of the hand of the king of Israel, who rise up against me.
Kgs. And Ahaz took the silver and gold that was found in the house of Jehovah,  in the treasures of the king's house,  sent it for a present to the king of Assyria.
Kgs. And the king of Assyria hearkened to him. And the king of Assyria went up against Damascus,  took it,  carried the people of it captive to Kir,  killed Rezin.
Kgs. And king Ahaz went to Damascus to meet Tiglath-pileser king of Assyria,  saw the altar that was at Damascus. And king Ahaz sent to Urijah the priest the form of the altar,  the pattern of it, according to all the workmanship of it.
Kgs. And Urijah the priest built an altar. According to all that king Ahaz had sent from Damascus, so Urijah the priest made it until the coming of king Ahaz from Damascus.
Kgs. And when the king came from Damascus, the king saw the altar. And the king drew near to the altar,  offered thereon.
Kgs. And he burnt his burnt offering and his meal offering,  poured his drink offering,  sprinkled the blood of his peace offerings, upon the altar.
Kgs. And the brazen altar, which was before Jehovah, he brought from the forefront of the house, from between his altar and the house of Jehovah,  put it on the north side of his altar.
Kgs. And king Ahaz commanded Urijah the priest, saying, Upon the great altar burn the morning burnt offering,  the evening meal offering,  the king's burnt offering,  his meal offering, with the burnt offering of all the people of the land,  their meal offering,  their drink offerings. And sprinkle upon it all the blood of the burnt offering,  all the blood of the sacrifice. But the brazen altar shall be for me to inquire by.
Kgs. Thus did Urijah the priest, according to all that king Ahaz commanded.
Kgs. And king Ahaz cut off the panels of the bases,  removed the laver from off them,  took down the sea from off the brazen oxen that were under it,  put it upon a pavement of stone.
Kgs. And the covered place for the sabbath that they had built in the house,  the king's entry outside, he turned from the house of Jehovah, because of the king of Assyria.
Kgs. Now the rest of the acts of Ahaz which he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
Kgs. And Ahaz slept with his fathers,  was buried with his fathers in the city of David. And Hezekiah his son reigned in his stead.
Kgs. In the twelfth year of Ahaz king of Judah, Hoshea the son of Elah began to reign in Samaria over Israel,  reigned nine years.
Kgs. And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah, yet not as the kings of Israel who were before him.
Kgs. Shalmaneser king of Assyria came up against him. And Hoshea became his servant,  brought him tribute.
Kgs. And the king of Assyria found conspiracy in Hoshea, for he had sent messengers to So king of Egypt,  offered no tribute to the king of Assyria, as he had done year by year. Therefore the king of Assyria shut him up,  bound him in prison.
Kgs. Then the king of Assyria came up throughout all the land,  went up to Samaria,  besieged it three years.
Kgs. In the ninth year of Hoshea, the king of Assyria took Samaria,  carried Israel away to Assyria,  placed them in Halah,  on the Habor, the river of Gozan,  in the cities of the Medes.
Kgs. And it was so, because the sons of Israel had sinned against Jehovah their God who brought them up out of the land of Egypt from under the hand of Pharaoh king of Egypt,  had feared other gods,
Kgs. and walked in the statutes of the nations, whom Jehovah cast out from before the sons of Israel,  of the kings of Israel, which they made.
Kgs. And the sons of Israel did things secretly that were not right against Jehovah their God. And they built for them high places in all their cities, from the tower of the watchmen to the fortified city.
Kgs. And they set up for them pillars and Asherim upon every high hill,  under every green tree,
Kgs. and there they burnt incense in all the high places, as the nations did whom Jehovah carried away before them. And they wrought wicked things to provoke Jehovah to anger.
Kgs. And they served idols, of which Jehovah had said to them, Ye shall not do this thing.
Kgs. Yet Jehovah testified to Israel,  to Judah, by every prophet,  every seer, saying, Turn ye from your evil ways,  keep my commandments and my statutes, according to all the law which I commanded your fathers,  which I sent to you by my servants the prophets.
Kgs. Notwithstanding, they would not hear,  stiffened their neck, like the neck of their fathers who did not believe in Jehovah their God.
Kgs. And they rejected his statutes,  his covenant that he made with their fathers,  his testimonies which he testified to them. And they followed vanity,  became vain,  went after the nations that were round about them, concerning whom Jehovah had charged them that they should not do like them.
Kgs. And they forsook all the commandments of Jehovah their God,  made for them molten images, even two calves,  made an Asherah,  worshiped all the host of heaven,  served Baal.
Kgs. And they caused their sons and their daughters to pass through the fire,  used divination and enchantments,  sold themselves to do that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah to provoke him to anger.
Kgs. Therefore Jehovah was very angry with Israel,  removed them out of his sight. There was none left but only the tribe of Judah.
Kgs. Also Judah did not keep the commandments of Jehovah their God,  walked in the statutes of Israel which they made.
Kgs. And Jehovah rejected all the seed of Israel,  afflicted them,  delivered them into the hand of spoilers, until he had cast them out of his sight.
Kgs. For he tore Israel from the house of David. And they made Jeroboam the son of Nebat king. And Jeroboam drove Israel from following Jehovah,  made them sin a great sin.
Kgs. And the sons of Israel walked in all the sins of Jeroboam which he did. They did not depart from them
Kgs. until Jehovah removed Israel out of his sight, as he spoke by all his servants the prophets. So Israel was carried away out of their own land to Assyria to this day.
Kgs. And the king of Assyria brought men from Babylon,  from Cuthah,  from Avva,  from Hamath and Sepharvaim,  placed them in the cities of Samaria instead of the sons of Israel. And they possessed Samaria,  dwelt in the cities of it.
Kgs. And so it was, at the beginning of their dwelling there, that they were not afraid of Jehovah. Therefore Jehovah sent lions among them, which killed some of them.
Kgs. Therefore they spoke to the king of Assyria, saying, The nations which thou have carried away,  placed in the cities of Samaria know not the law of the god of the land. Therefore he has sent lions among them, , behold, they kill them, because they do not know the law of the god of the land.
Kgs. Then the king of Assyria commanded, saying, Carry there one of the priests whom ye brought from there,  let them go and dwell there. And let him teach them the law of the god of the land.
Kgs. So one of the priests whom they had carried away from Samaria came and dwelt in Bethel,  taught them how they should fear Jehovah.
Kgs. However every nation made gods of their own,  put them in the houses of the high places which the Samaritans had made, every nation in their cities wherein they dwelt.
Kgs. And the men of Babylon made Succoth-benoth,  the men of Cuth made Nergal,  the men of Hamath made Ashima,
Kgs. and the Avvites made Nibhaz and Tartak. And the Sepharvites burnt their sons in the fire to Adrammelech and Anammelech, the gods of Sepharvaim.
Kgs. So they were afraid of Jehovah,  made for them priests of the high places from among themselves, who sacrificed for them in the houses of the high places.
Kgs. They were afraid of Jehovah,  served their own gods, after the manner of the nations from among whom they had been carried away.
Kgs. To this day they do after the former manner. They do not fear Jehovah, neither do they after their statutes, or after their ordinances, or after the law or after the commandment which Jehovah commanded the sons of Jacob, whom he named Israel,
Kgs. with whom Jehovah had made a covenant,  charged them, saying, Ye shall not fear other gods, nor bow yourselves to them, nor serve them, nor sacrifice to them.
Kgs. But Jehovah, who brought you up out of the land of Egypt with great power and with an outstretched arm, him ye shall fear,  to him ye shall bow yourselves,  to him ye shall sacrifice.
Kgs. And the statutes and the ordinances,  the law and the commandment, which he wrote for you, ye shall observe to do for evermore. And ye shall not fear other gods.
Kgs. And the covenant that I have made with you ye shall not forget. Neither shall ye fear other gods,
Kgs. but ye shall ye fear Jehovah your God,  he will deliver you out of the hand of all your enemies.
Kgs. However they did not hearken,  they did after their former manner.
Kgs. So these nations were afraid of Jehovah,  served their graven images, their sons likewise,  their son's sons, as did their fathers, so do they to this day.
Kgs. Now it came to pass in the third year of Hoshea son of Elah king of Israel, that Hezekiah the son of Ahaz king of Judah began to reign.
Kgs. He was twenty-five years old when he began to reign,  he reigned twenty-nine years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Abi the daughter of Zechariah.
Kgs. And he did that which was right in the eyes of Jehovah, according to all that David his father had done.
Kgs. He removed the high places,  broke the pillars,  cut down the Asherah,  he broke in pieces the brazen serpent that Moses had made. For to those days the sons of Israel burned incense to it,  he called it Nehushtan.
Kgs. He trusted in Jehovah, the God of Israel, so that there was none like him among all the kings of Judah after him, nor among those who were before him.
Kgs. For he clung to Jehovah. He did not depart from following him,  kept his commandments, which Jehovah commanded Moses.
Kgs. And Jehovah was with him. Wherever he went forth he prospered. And he rebelled against the king of Assyria,  did not serve him.
Kgs. He smote the Philistines to Gaza and the borders of it, from the tower of the watchmen to the fortified city.
Kgs. And it came to pass in the fourth year of king Hezekiah, which was the seventh year of Hoshea son of Elah king of Israel, that Shalmaneser king of Assyria came up against Samaria,  besieged it.
Kgs. And at the end of three years they took it. Samaria was taken in the sixth year of Hezekiah, which was the ninth year of Hoshea king of Israel.
Kgs. And the king of Assyria carried Israel away to Assyria,  put them in Halah,  on the Habor, the river of Gozan,  in the cities of the Medes,
Kgs. because they did not obey the voice of Jehovah their God,  transgressed his covenant, even all that Moses the servant of Jehovah commanded,  would not hear it, nor do it.
Kgs. Now in the fourteenth year of king Hezekiah, Sennacherib king of Assyria came up against all the fortified cities of Judah,  took them.
Kgs. And Hezekiah king of Judah sent to the king of Assyria to Lachish, saying, I have offended. Return from me. That which thou put on me I will bear. And the king of Assyria appointed to Hezekiah king of Judah three hundred talents of silver and thirty talents of gold.
Kgs. And Hezekiah gave him all the silver that was found in the house of Jehovah,  in the treasures of the king's house.
Kgs. At that time Hezekiah cut off the gold from the doors of the temple of Jehovah,  from the pillars which Hezekiah king of Judah had overlaid,  gave it to the king of Assyria.
Kgs. And the king of Assyria sent Tartan and Rab-saris and Rabshakeh from Lachish to king Hezekiah with a great army to Jerusalem. And they went up and came to Jerusalem. And when they came up, they came and stood by the conduit of the upper pool, which is on the highway of the fuller's field.
Kgs. And when they had called to the king, there came out to them Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, who was over the household,  Shebnah the scribe,  Joah the son of Asaph the recorder.
Kgs. And Rabshakeh said to them, Say ye now to Hezekiah, Thus says the great king, the king of Assyria, What confidence is this in which thou trust?
Kgs. Thou say (but they are but vain words), There is counsel and strength for the war. Now on whom do thou trust that thou have rebelled against me?
Kgs. Now, behold, thou trust upon the staff of this bruised reed, even upon Egypt, on which if a man leans it will go into his hand,  pierce it. So is Pharaoh king of Egypt to all who trust on him.
Kgs. But if ye say to me, We trust in Jehovah our God, is that not he whose high places and whose altars Hezekiah has taken away,  has said to Judah and to Jerusalem, Ye shall worship before this altar in Jerusalem?
Kgs. Now therefore, I pray thee, give pledges to my master the king of Assyria,  I will give thee two thousand horses, if thou be able on thy part to set riders upon them.
Kgs. How then can thou turn away the face of one captain of the least of my master's servants,  put thy trust on Egypt for chariots and for horsemen?
Kgs. Have I now come up without Jehovah against this place to destroy it? Jehovah said to me, Go up against this land,  destroy it.
Kgs. Then Eliakim the son of Hilkiah,  Shebnah,  Joah, said to Rabshakeh, Speak, I pray thee, to thy servants in the Syrian language, for we understand it. And do not speak with us in the Jews' language, in the ears of the people who are on the wall.
Kgs. But Rabshakeh said to them, Has my master sent me to thy master,  to thee, to speak these words? Has he not sent me to the men who sit on the wall, to eat their own dung,  to drink their own urine with you?
Kgs. Then Rabshakeh stood,  cried with a loud voice in the Jews' language,  spoke, saying, Hear ye the word of the great king, the king of Assyria.
Kgs. Thus says the king, Let not Hezekiah deceive you, for he will not be able to deliver you out of his hand.
Kgs. Neither let Hezekiah make you trust in Jehovah, saying, Jehovah will surely deliver us,  this city shall not be given into the hand of the king of Assyria.
Kgs. Do not hearken to Hezekiah. For thus says the king of Assyria, Make your peace with me,  come out to me. And eat ye every man of his vine,  every man of his fig tree,  drink ye every man the waters of his own cistern,
Kgs. until I come and take you away to a land like your own land, a land of grain and new wine, a land of bread and vineyards, a land of olive trees and of honey, that ye may live,  not die. And do not hearken to Hezekiah when he persuades you, saying, Jehovah will deliver us.
Kgs. Have any of the gods of the nations ever delivered his land out of the hand of the king of Assyria?
Kgs. Where are the gods of Hamath,  of Arpad? Where are the gods of Sepharvaim, of Hena,  Ivvah? Have they delivered Samaria out of my hand?
Kgs. Who are they among all the gods of the countries that have delivered their country out of my hand, that Jehovah should deliver Jerusalem out of my hand?
Kgs. But the people were silent,  did not answer him a word, for the king's commandment was, saying, Do not answer him.
Kgs. Then Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, who was over the household,  Shebna the scribe,  Joah the son of Asaph the recorder, came to Hezekiah with their clothes torn,  told him the words of Rabshakeh.
Kgs. And it came to pass, when king Hezekiah heard it, that he tore his clothes,  covered himself with sackcloth,  went into the house of Jehovah.
Kgs. And he sent Eliakim, who was over the household,  Shebna the scribe,  the elders of the priests (covered with sackcloth) to Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz.
Kgs. And they said to him, Thus says Hezekiah, This day is a day of trouble,  of rebuke,  of blasphemy, for the sons have come to the birth,  there is no strength to bring forth.
Kgs. It may be that Jehovah thy God will hear all the words of Rabshakeh whom the king of Assyria his master has sent to defy the living God,  will rebuke the words which Jehovah thy God has heard. Therefore lift up thy prayer for the remnant that is left.
Kgs. So the servants of king Hezekiah came to Isaiah.
Kgs. And Isaiah said to them, Thus shall ye say to your master, Thus says Jehovah, Do not be afraid of the words that thou have heard, with which the servants of the king of Assyria have blasphemed me.
Kgs. Behold, I will put a spirit in him,  he shall hear news,  shall return to his own land. And I will cause him to fall by the sword in his own land.
Kgs. So Rabshakeh returned,  found the king of Assyria warring against Libnah, for he had heard that he was departed from Lachish.
Kgs. And when he heard say of Tirhakah king of Ethiopia, Behold, he comes out to fight against thee, he sent messengers again to Hezekiah, saying,
Kgs. Thus shall ye speak to Hezekiah king of Judah, saying, Do not let thy God in whom thou trust deceive thee, saying, Jerusalem shall not be given into the hand of the king of Assyria.
Kgs. Behold, thou have heard what the kings of Assyria have done to all lands, by destroying them utterly. And shall thou be delivered?
Kgs. Have the gods of the nations delivered them, which my fathers have destroyed, Gozan,  Haran,  Rezeph,  the sons of Eden that were in Telassar?
Kgs. Where is the king of Hamath,  the king of Arpad,  the king of the city of Sepharvaim, of Hena,  Ivvah?
Kgs. And Hezekiah received the letter from the hand of the messengers,  read it. And Hezekiah went up to the house of Jehovah,  spread it before Jehovah.
Kgs. And Hezekiah prayed before Jehovah,  said, O Jehovah, the God of Israel, who sits above the cherubim, thou are the God, even thou alone, of all the kingdoms of the earth. Thou have made heaven and earth.
Kgs. Incline thine ear, O Jehovah,  hear. Open thine eyes, O Jehovah,  see. And hear the words of Sennacherib, with which he has sent for him to defy the living God.
Kgs. Of a truth, Jehovah, the kings of Assyria have laid waste the nations and their lands,
Kgs. and have cast their gods into the fire, for they were no gods,  the work of men's hands, wood and stone. Therefore they have destroyed them.
Kgs. Now therefore, O Jehovah our God, save thou us, I beseech thee, out of his hand, that all the kingdoms of the earth may know that thou Jehovah are God alone.
Kgs. Then Isaiah the son of Amoz sent to Hezekiah, saying, Thus says Jehovah, the God of Israel, Whereas thou have prayed to me against Sennacherib king of Assyria, I have heard.
Kgs. This is the word that Jehovah has spoken concerning him: The virgin daughter of Zion has despised thee and laughed thee to scorn. The daughter of Jerusalem has shaken her head at thee.
Kgs. Whom have thou defied and blasphemed? And against whom have thou exalted thy voice and lifted up thine eyes on high? Even against the Holy One of Israel.
Kgs. By thy messengers thou have defied the Lord,  have said, With the multitude of my chariots I have come up to the height of the mountains, to the innermost parts of Lebanon. And I will cut down the tall cedars of it,  the choice fir trees of it. And I will enter into his farthest lodging-place, the forest of his fruitful field.
Kgs. I have dug and drunk strange waters,  with the sole of my feet I will dry up all the rivers of Egypt.
Kgs. Have thou not heard how I have done it long ago,  formed it of ancient times? Now I have brought it to pass, that thou should be to lay waste fortified cities into ruinous heaps.
Kgs. Therefore their inhabitants were of small power, they were dismayed and confounded. They were as the grass of the field,  as the green herb, as the grass on the housetops,  as grain blasted before it is grown up.
Kgs. But I know thy sitting down,  thy going out,  thy coming in,  thy raging against me.
Kgs. Because of thy raging against me,  because thine arrogance has come up into my ears, therefore I will put my hook in thy nose,  my bridle in thy lips,  I will turn thee back by the way by which thou came.
Kgs. And this shall be the sign to thee: Ye shall eat this year that which grows of itself,  in the second year that which springs of the same. And in the third year sow ye,  reap,  plant vineyards,  eat the fruit of it.
Kgs. And the remnant that is escaped of the house of Judah shall again take root downward,  bear fruit upward.
Kgs. For out of Jerusalem shall go forth a remnant,  out of mount Zion those who shall escape. The zeal of Jehovah shall perform this.
Kgs. Therefore thus says Jehovah concerning the king of Assyria, He shall not come to this city, nor shoot an arrow there, neither shall he come before it with shield, nor cast up a mound against it.
Kgs. By the way that he came, by the same shall he return,  he shall not come to this city, says Jehovah.
Kgs. For I will defend this city to save it, for my own sake,  for my servant David's sake.
Kgs. And it came to pass that night, that the agent of Jehovah went forth,  smote in the camp of the Assyrians a hundred eighty-five thousand. And when men arose early in the morning, behold, these were all dead bodies.
Kgs. So Sennacherib king of Assyria departed,  went and returned,  dwelt at Nineveh.
Kgs. And it came to pass, as he was worshiping in the house of Nisroch his god, that Adrammelech and Sharezer smote him with the sword,  they escaped into the land of Ararat. And Esar-haddon his son reigned in his stead.
Kgs. In those days Hezekiah was sick to death. And Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz came to him,  said to him, Thus says Jehovah, Set thy house in order, for thou shall die,  not live.
Kgs. Then he turned his face to the wall,  prayed to Jehovah, saying,
Kgs. Remember now, O Jehovah, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth and with a perfect heart,  have done that which is good in thy sight. And Hezekiah wept greatly.
Kgs. And it came to pass, before Isaiah was gone out into the middle part of the city, that the word of Jehovah came to him, saying,
Kgs. Turn back,  say to Hezekiah the prince of my people, Thus says Jehovah, the God of David thy father, I have heard thy prayer, I have seen thy tears. Behold, I will heal thee. On the third day thou shall go up to the house of Jehovah.
Kgs. And I will add to thy days fifteen years. And I will deliver thee and this city out of the hand of the king of Assyria. And I will defend this city for my own sake,  for my servant David's sake.
Kgs. And Isaiah said, Take a cake of figs. And they took and laid it on the boil,  he recovered.
Kgs. And Hezekiah said to Isaiah, What shall be the sign that Jehovah will heal me,  that I shall go up to the house of Jehovah the third day?
Kgs. And Isaiah said, This shall be the sign to thee from Jehovah, that Jehovah will do the thing that he has spoken: Shall the shadow go forward ten steps, or go back ten steps?
Kgs. And Hezekiah answered, It is a light thing for the shadow to go forward ten steps. No,  let the shadow return backward ten steps.
Kgs. And Isaiah the prophet cried to Jehovah,  he brought the shadow ten steps backward, by which it had gone down on the dial of Ahaz.
Kgs. At that time Berodach-baladan the son of Baladan, king of Babylon, sent letters and a present to Hezekiah, for he had heard that Hezekiah had been sick.
Kgs. And Hezekiah hearkened to them,  showed them all the house of his precious things, the silver,  the gold,  the spices,  the precious oil,  the house of his armor,  all that was found in his treasures. There was nothing in his house, nor in all his dominion, that Hezekiah did not show them.
Kgs. Then Isaiah the prophet came to king Hezekiah,  said to him, What did these men say,  from where did they come to thee? And Hezekiah said, They have come from a far country, even from Babylon.
Kgs. And he said, What have they seen in thy house? And Hezekiah answered, They have seen all that is in my house. There is nothing among my treasures that I have not shown them.
Kgs. And Isaiah said to Hezekiah, Hear the word of Jehovah.
Kgs. Behold, the days come that all that is in thy house,  that which thy fathers have laid up in store to this day, shall be carried to Babylon. Nothing shall be left, says Jehovah.
Kgs. And of thy sons who shall issue from thee, whom thou shall beget, they shall take away. And they shall be eunuchs in the palace of the king of Babylon.
Kgs. Then Hezekiah said to Isaiah, The word of Jehovah which thou have spoken is good. He said moreover, Is it not so, if peace and truth shall be in my days?
Kgs. Now the rest of the acts of Hezekiah,  all his might,  how he made the pool,  the conduit,  brought water into the city, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
Kgs. And Hezekiah slept with his fathers,  Manasseh his son reigned in his stead.
Kgs. Manasseh was twelve years old when he began to reign,  he reigned fifty-five years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Hephzibah.
Kgs. And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah, according to the abominations of the nations whom Jehovah cast out before the sons of Israel.
Kgs. For he built again the high places which Hezekiah his father had destroyed. And he reared up altars for Baal,  made an Asherah, as did Ahab king of Israel,  worshiped all the host of heaven,  served them.
Kgs. And he built altars in the house of Jehovah, of which Jehovah said, In Jerusalem I will put my name.
Kgs. And he built altars for all the host of heaven in the two courts of the house of Jehovah.
Kgs. And he made his son to pass through the fire,  practiced augury,  used enchantments,  dealt with psychics,  with sorcery. He wrought much evil in the sight of Jehovah to provoke him to anger.
Kgs. And he set the graven image of Asherah, that he had made, in the house of which Jehovah said to David and to Solomon his son, In this house,  in Jerusalem, which I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel, I will put my name forever.
Kgs. Neither will I cause the feet of Israel to wander any more out of the land which I gave their fathers, if only they will observe to do according to all that I have commanded them,  according to all the law that my servant Moses commanded them.
Kgs. But they did not hearken. And Manasseh seduced them to do that which is evil more than did the nations whom Jehovah destroyed before the sons of Israel.
Kgs. And Jehovah spoke by his servants the prophets, saying,
Kgs. Because Manasseh king of Judah has done these abominations,  has done wickedly above all that the Amorites did who were before him,  has made Judah also to sin with his idols,
Kgs. therefore thus says Jehovah, the God of Israel, Behold, I bring such evil upon Jerusalem and Judah, that whoever hears of it, both his ears shall tingle.
Kgs. And I will stretch over Jerusalem the line of Samaria,  the plummet of the house of Ahab. And I will wipe Jerusalem as a man wipes a dish, wiping it and turning it upside down.
Kgs. And I will cast off the remnant of my inheritance,  deliver them into the hand of their enemies. And they shall become a prey and a spoil to all their enemies,
Kgs. because they have done that which is evil in my sight,  have provoked me to anger, since the day their fathers came forth out of Egypt even to this day.
Kgs. Moreover Manasseh shed very much innocent blood till he had filled Jerusalem from one end to another, besides his sin with which he made Judah to sin in doing that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah.
Kgs. Now the rest of the acts of Manasseh,  all that he did,  his sin that he sinned, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
Kgs. And Manasseh slept with his fathers,  was buried in the garden of his own house, in the garden of Uzza,  Amon his son reigned in his stead.
Kgs. Amon was twenty-two years old when he began to reign,  he reigned two years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Meshullemeth the daughter of Haruz of Jotbah.
Kgs. And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah as did Manasseh his father.
Kgs. And he walked in all the way that his father walked in,  served the idols that his father served,  worshiped them.
Kgs. And he forsook Jehovah, the God of his fathers,  did not walk in the way of Jehovah.
Kgs. And the servants of Amon conspired against him,  put the king to death in his own house.
Kgs. But the people of the land killed all those who had conspired against king Amon. And the people of the land made Josiah his son king in his stead.
Kgs. Now the rest of the acts of Amon which he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
Kgs. And he was buried in his sepulcher in the garden of Uzza,  Josiah his son reigned in his stead.
Kgs. Josiah was eight years old when he began to reign,  he reigned thirty-one years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Jedidah the daughter of Adaiah of Bozkath.
Kgs. And he did that which was right in the eyes of Jehovah,  walked in all the way of David his father,  did not turn aside to the right hand or to the left.
Kgs. And it came to pass, in the eighteenth year of king Josiah, that the king sent Shaphan, the son of Azaliah the son of Meshullam, the scribe, to the house of Jehovah, saying,
Kgs. Go up to Hilkiah the high priest that he may sum the money which is brought into the house of Jehovah, which the keepers of the threshold have gathered of the people.
Kgs. And let them deliver it into the hand of the workmen who have the oversight of the house of Jehovah. And let them give it to the workmen who are in the house of Jehovah, to repair the broken parts of the house,
Kgs. to the carpenters,  to the builders,  to the masons,  for buying timber and hewn stone to repair the house.
Kgs. However there was no reckoning made with them of the money that was delivered into their hand, for they dealt faithfully.
Kgs. And Hilkiah the high priest said to Shaphan the scribe, I have found the book of the law in the house of Jehovah. And Hilkiah delivered the book to Shaphan,  he read it.
Kgs. And Shaphan the scribe came to the king,  brought the king word again,  said, Thy servants have emptied out the money that was found in the house,  have delivered it into the hand of the workmen who have the oversight of the house of Jehovah.
Kgs. And Shaphan the scribe told the king, saying, Hilkiah the priest has delivered to me a book. And Shaphan read it before the king.
Kgs. And it came to pass, when the king had heard the words of the book of the law, that he tore his clothes.
Kgs. And the king commanded Hilkiah the priest,  Ahikam the son of Shaphan,  Achbor the son of Micaiah,  Shaphan the scribe,  Asaiah the king's servant, saying,
Kgs. Go ye, inquire of Jehovah for me,  for the people,  for all Judah, concerning the words of this book that is found, for great is the wrath of Jehovah that is kindled against us, because our fathers have not hearkened to the words of this book to do according to all that which is written concerning us.
Kgs. So Hilkiah the priest,  Ahikam,  Achbor,  Shaphan,  Asaiah, went to Huldah the prophetess, the wife of Shallum the son of Tikvah, the son of Harhas, keeper of the wardrobe (now she dwelt in Jerusalem in the second quarter),  they conversed with her.
Kgs. And she said to them, Thus says Jehovah, the God of Israel: Tell ye the man who sent you to me,
Kgs. Thus says Jehovah, Behold, I will bring evil upon this place,  upon the inhabitants of it, even all the words of the book which the king of Judah has read.
Kgs. Because they have forsaken me,  have burned incense to other gods, that they might provoke me to anger with all the work of their hands, therefore my wrath shall be kindled against this place,  it shall not be quenched.
Kgs. But to the king of Judah, who sent you to inquire of Jehovah, thus shall ye say to him, Thus says Jehovah, the God of Israel: As concerning the words which thou have heard,
Kgs. because thy heart was tender,  thou humbled thyself before Jehovah when thou heard what I spoke against this place,  against the inhabitants of it, that they should become a desolation and a curse,  have torn thy clothes,  wept before me, I also have heard thee, says Jehovah.
Kgs. Therefore, behold, I will gather thee to thy fathers,  thou shall be gathered to thy grave in peace, neither shall thine eyes see all the evil which I will bring upon this place. And they brought the king word again.
Kgs. And the king sent,  they gathered to him all the elders of Judah and of Jerusalem.
Kgs. And the king went up to the house of Jehovah,  all the men of Judah and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem with him,  the priests,  the prophets,  all the people, both small and great. And he read in their ears all the words of the book of the covenant which was found in the house of Jehovah.
Kgs. And the king stood by the pillar,  made a covenant before Jehovah to walk after Jehovah,  to keep his commandments,  his testimonies,  his statutes, with all his heart,  all his soul, to confirm the words of this covenant that were written in this book. And all the people stood to the covenant.
Kgs. And the king commanded Hilkiah the high priest,  the priests of the second order,  the keepers of the threshold, to bring forth out of the temple of Jehovah all the vessels that were made for Baal,  for the Asherah,  for all the host of heaven,  he burned them outside Jerusalem in the fields of the Kidron,  carried the ashes of them to Bethel.
Kgs. And he put down the idolatrous priests, whom the kings of Judah had ordained to burn incense in the high places in the cities of Judah,  in the places round about Jerusalem; those also who burned incense to Baal, to the sun,  to the moon,  to the planets,  to all the host of heaven.
Kgs. And he brought out the Asherah from the house of Jehovah, outside Jerusalem, to the brook Kidron,  burned it at the brook Kidron,  beat it to dust,  cast the dust of it upon the graves of the common people.
Kgs. And he broke down the houses of the sodomites that were in the house of Jehovah where the women wove hangings for the Asherah.
Kgs. And he brought all the priests out of the cities of Judah,  defiled the high places where the priests had burned incense, from Geba to Beersheba. And he broke down the high places of the gates that were at the entrance of the gate of Joshua the governor of the city, which were on a man's left hand at the gate of the city.
Kgs. Nevertheless the priests of the high places did not come up to the altar of Jehovah in Jerusalem,  they ate unleavened bread among their brothers.
Kgs. And he defiled Topheth, which is in the valley of the sons of Hinnom, that no man might make his son or his daughter to pass through the fire to Molech.
Kgs. And he took away the horses that the kings of Judah had given to the sun, at the entrance of the house of Jehovah, by the chamber of Nathan-melech the chamberlain, which was in the suburbs. And he burned the chariots of the sun with fire.
Kgs. And the altars that were on the roof of the upper chamber of Ahaz, which the kings of Judah had made,  the altars which Manasseh had made in the two courts of the house of Jehovah, the king broke down,  beat them down from there,  cast the dust of them into the brook Kidron.
Kgs. And the king defiled the high places that were before Jerusalem, which were on the right hand of the mount of corruption, which Solomon the king of Israel had built for Ashtoreth the abomination of the Sidonians,  for Chemosh the abomination of Moab,  for Milcom the abomination of the sons of Ammon.
Kgs. And he broke in pieces the pillars,  cut down the Asherim,  filled their places with the bones of men.
Kgs. Moreover the altar that was at Bethel,  the high place which Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin, had made, even that altar and the high place he broke down. And he burned the high place and beat it to dust,  burned the Asherah.
Kgs. And as Josiah turned himself, he noticed the sepulchers that were there in the mount. And he sent,  took the bones out of the sepulchers,  burned them upon the altar,  defiled it, according to the word of Jehovah which the man of God proclaimed, who proclaimed these things.
Kgs. Then he said, What monument is that which I see? And the men of the city told him, It is the sepulcher of the man of God who came from Judah,  proclaimed these things that thou have done against the altar of Bethel.
Kgs. And he said, Let him be; let no man move his bones. So they let his bones alone, with the bones of the prophet who came out of Samaria.
Kgs. And Josiah also took away all the houses of the high places that were in the cities of Samaria, which the kings of Israel had made to provoke Jehovah to anger. And he did to them according to all the acts that he had done in Bethel.
Kgs. And he killed all the priests of the high places that were there, upon the altars,  burned men's bones upon them. And he returned to Jerusalem.
Kgs. And the king commanded all the people, saying, Keep the Passover to Jehovah your God, as it is written in this book of the covenant.
Kgs. Surely such a Passover was not kept from the days of the judges who judged Israel, nor in all the days of the kings of Israel, nor of the kings of Judah.
Kgs. But in the eighteenth year of king Josiah this Passover was kept to Jehovah in Jerusalem.
Kgs. Moreover Josiah put away the psychics,  the wizards,  the teraphim,  the idols,  all the abominations that were seen in the land of Judah and in Jerusalem, that he might perform the words of the law which were written in the book that Hilkiah the priest found in the house of Jehovah.
Kgs. And there was no king before him like him, who turned to Jehovah with all his heart,  with all his soul,  with all his might, according to all the law of Moses; neither arose any like him after him.
Kgs. Notwithstanding, Jehovah did not turn from the fierceness of his great wrath, with which his anger was kindled against Judah, because of all the provocations with which Manasseh had provoked him.
Kgs. And Jehovah said, I will remove Judah also out of my sight as I have removed Israel,  I will cast off this city which I have chosen, even Jerusalem,  the house of which I said, My name shall be there.
Kgs. Now the rest of the acts of Josiah,  all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
Kgs. In his days Pharaoh-necoh king of Egypt went up against the king of Assyria to the river Euphrates,  king Josiah went against him. And Pharaoh-necoh killed him at Megiddo when he had seen him.
Kgs. And his servants carried him in a chariot dead from Megiddo,  brought him to Jerusalem,  buried him in his own sepulcher. And the people of the land took Jehoahaz the son of Josiah,  anointed him,  made him king in his father's stead.
Kgs. Jehoahaz was twenty-three years old when he began to reign,  he reigned three months in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Hamutal the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah.
Kgs. And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah, according to all that his fathers had done.
Kgs. And Pharaoh-necoh put him in bonds at Riblah in the land of Hamath, that he might not reign in Jerusalem. And he put the land to a tribute of a hundred talents of silver,  a talent of gold.
Kgs. And Pharaoh-necoh made Eliakim the son of Josiah king in the place of Josiah his father,  changed his name to Jehoiakim. But he took Jehoahaz away,  he came to Egypt,  died there.
Kgs. And Jehoiakim gave the silver and the gold to Pharaoh,  he taxed the land to give the money according to the commandment of Pharaoh. He exacted the silver and the gold from the people of the land, of every one according to his taxation, to give it to Pharaoh-necoh.
Kgs. Jehoiakim was twenty-five years old when he began to reign,  he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Zebidah the daughter of Pedaiah of Rumah.
Kgs. And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah, according to all that his fathers had done.
Kgs. In his days Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came up,  Jehoiakim became his servant three years. Then he turned and rebelled against him.
Kgs. And Jehovah sent against him bands of the Chaldeans,  bands of the Syrians,  bands of the Moabites,  bands of the sons of Ammon,  sent them against Judah to destroy it, according to the word of Jehovah, which he spoke by his servants the prophets.
Kgs. Surely at the commandment of Jehovah this came upon Judah, to remove them out of his sight, for the sins of Manasseh, according to all that he did,
Kgs. and also for the innocent blood that he shed, for he filled Jerusalem with innocent blood,  Jehovah would not pardon.
Kgs. Now the rest of the acts of Jehoiakim,  all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
Kgs. So Jehoiakim slept with his fathers,  Jehoiachin his son reigned in his stead.
Kgs. And the king of Egypt did not come again any more out of his land, for the king of Babylon had taken, from the brook of Egypt to the river Euphrates, all that pertained to the king of Egypt.
Kgs. Jehoiachin was eighteen years old when he began to reign,  he reigned in Jerusalem three months. And his mother's name was Nehushta the daughter of Elnathan of Jerusalem.
Kgs. And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah, according to all that his father had done.
Kgs. At that time the servants of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came up to Jerusalem,  the city was besieged.
Kgs. And Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came to the city while his servants were besieging it.
Kgs. And Jehoiachin the king of Judah went out to the king of Babylon, he,  his mother,  his servants,  his princes,  his officers. And the king of Babylon took him in the eighth year of his reign.
Kgs. And he carried out from there all the treasures of the house of Jehovah,  the treasures of the king's house,  cut in pieces all the vessels of gold, which Solomon king of Israel had made in the temple of Jehovah, as Jehovah had said.
Kgs. And he carried away all Jerusalem,  all the rulers,  all the mighty men of valor, even ten thousand captives,  all the craftsmen and the blacksmiths. None remained except the poorest sort of the people of the land.
Kgs. And he carried away Jehoiachin to Babylon. And the king's mother,  the king's wives,  his officers,  the chief men of the land, he carried into captivity from Jerusalem to Babylon.
Kgs. And all the men of might, even seven thousand,  the craftsmen and the blacksmiths a thousand, all of them strong and apt for war, even them the king of Babylon brought captive to Babylon.
Kgs. And the king of Babylon made Mattaniah, Jehoiachin's father's brother, king is his stead,  changed his name to Zedekiah.
Kgs. Zedekiah was twenty-one years old when he began to reign,  he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Hamutal the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah.
Kgs. And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah, according to all that Jehoiakim had done.
Kgs. For it came to pass in Jerusalem and Judah through the anger of Jehovah, until he had cast them out from his presence. And Zedekiah rebelled against the king of Babylon.
Kgs. And it came to pass in the ninth year of his reign, in the tenth month, in the tenth day of the month, that Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came, he and all his army, against Jerusalem,  encamped against it. And they built forts against it round about.
Kgs. So the city was besieged to the eleventh year of king Zedekiah.
Kgs. On the ninth day of the fourth month the famine was severe in the city, so that there was no bread for the people of the land.
Kgs. Then a breach was made in the city,  all the men of war fled by night by the way of the gate between the two walls, which was by the king's garden (now the Chaldeans were against the city round about),  the king went by the way of the Arabah.
Kgs. But the army of the Chaldeans pursued after the king,  overtook him in the plains of Jericho. And all his army was scattered from him.
Kgs. Then they took the king,  carried him up to the king of Babylon to Riblah. And they gave judgment upon him.
Kgs. And they killed the sons of Zedekiah before his eyes,  put out the eyes of Zedekiah,  bound him in fetters,  carried him to Babylon.
Kgs. Now in the fifth month, on the seventh day of the month, which was the nineteenth year of king Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard, a servant of the king of Babylon, came to Jerusalem.
Kgs. And he burnt the house of Jehovah,  the king's house. And all the houses of Jerusalem, even every great house, he burnt with fire.
Kgs. And all the army of the Chaldeans, that were with the captain of the guard, broke down the walls of Jerusalem round about.
Kgs. And the remnant of the people that were left in the city,  those that fell away, that fell to the king of Babylon,  the remnant of the multitude, Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard carried away captive.
Kgs. But the captain of the guard left of the poorest of the land to be vinedressers and husbandmen.
Kgs. And the pillars of brass that were in the house of Jehovah,  the bases and the brazen sea that were in the house of Jehovah, the Chaldeans broke in pieces,  carried the brass of them to Babylon.
Kgs. And they took away the pots,  the shovels,  the snuffers,  the spoons,  all the vessels of brass with which they ministered.
Kgs. And the captain of the guard took away the firepans,  the basins, that which was of gold, in gold,  that which was of silver, in silver.
Kgs. The two pillars, the one sea,  the bases, which Solomon had made for the house of Jehovah, the brass of all these vessels was without weight.
Kgs. The height of the one pillar was eighteen cubits,  a capital of brass was upon it. And the height of the capital was three cubits, with network and pomegranates upon the capital round about, all of brass. And the second pillar had like these with network.
Kgs. And the captain of the guard took Seraiah the chief priest,  Zephaniah the second priest,  the three keepers of the threshold.
Kgs. And he took an officer out of the city who was set over the men of war; and five men of those who saw the king's face, who were found in the city; and the scribe, the captain of the army, who mustered the people of the land; and sixty men of the people of the land who were found in the city.
Kgs. And Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard took them,  brought them to the king of Babylon to Riblah.
Kgs. And the king of Babylon smote them,  put them to death at Riblah in the land of Hamath. So Judah was carried away captive out of his land.
Kgs. And as for the people who were left in the land of Judah, whom Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon had left, he made Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, governor over them.
Kgs. Now when all the captains of the forces, they and their men, heard that the king of Babylon had made Gedaliah governor, they came to Gedaliah to Mizpah, even Ishmael the son of Nethaniah,  Johanan the son of Kareah,  Seraiah the son of Tanhumeth the Netophathite,  Jaazaniah the son of the Maacathite, they and their men.
Kgs. And Gedaliah swore to them and to their men,  said to them, Fear not because of the servants of the Chaldeans. Dwell in the land,  serve the king of Babylon,  it shall be well with you.
Kgs. But it came to pass in the seventh month, that Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, the son of Elishama, of the royal seed, came,  ten men with him,  smote Gedaliah, so that he died,  the Jews and the Chaldeans who were with him at Mizpah.
Kgs. And all the people, both small and great,  the captains of the forces, arose,  came to Egypt, for they were afraid of the Chaldeans.
Kgs. And it came to pass in the thirty-seventh year of the captivity of Jehoiachin king of Judah, in the twelfth month, on the twenty-seventh day of the month, that Evil-merodach king of Babylon, in the year that he began to reign, lifted up the head of Jehoiachin king of Judah out of prison.
Kgs. And he spoke kindly to him,  set his throne above the throne of the kings that were with him in Babylon,
Kgs. and changed his prison garments. And Jehoiachin ate bread before him continually all the days of his life,
Kgs. and for his allowance. There was a continual allowance given him from the king, every day a portion, all the days of his life.
I Chronicles
Chr. Adam, Seth, Enosh,
Chr. Kenan, Mahalalel, Jared,
Chr. Enoch, Methuselah, Lamech,
Chr. Noah, Shem, Ham,  Japheth.
Chr. The sons of Japheth: Gomer,  Magog,  Madai,  Javan,  Tubal,  Meshech,  Tiras.
Chr. And the sons of Gomer: Ashkenaz,  Diphath,  Togarmah.
Chr. And the sons of Javan: Elishah,  Tarshish, Kittim,  Rodanim.
Chr. The sons of Ham: Cush,  Mizraim, Put,  Canaan.
Chr. And the sons of Cush: Seba,  Havilah,  Sabta,  Raama,  Sabteca. And the sons of Raamah: Sheba,  Dedan.
Chr. And Cush begot Nimrod; he began to be a mighty one on the earth.
Chr. And Mizraim begot Ludim,  Anamim,  Lehabim,  Naphtuhim,
Chr. and Pathrusim,  Casluhim (from whence came the Philistines),  Caphtorim.
Chr. And Canaan begot Sidon his firstborn,  Heth,
Chr. and the Jebusite,  the Amorite,  the Girgashite,
Chr. and the Hivite,  the Arkite,  the Sinite,
Chr. and the Arvadite,  the Zemarite,  the Hamathite.
Chr. The sons of Shem: Elam,  Asshur,  Arphaxad,  Lud,  Aram,  Uz,  Hul,  Gether,  Meshech.
Chr. And Arphaxad begot Shelah,  Shelah begot Eber.
Chr. And to Eber were born two sons. The name of the one was Peleg, for in his days the earth was divided. And his brother's name was Joktan.
Chr. And Joktan begot Almodad,  Sheleph,  Hazarmaveth,  Jerah,
Chr. and Hadoram,  Uzal,  Diklah,
Chr. and Ebal,  Abimael,  Sheba,
Chr. and Ophir,  Havilah,  Jobab; all these were the sons of Joktan.
Chr. Shem, Arphaxad, Shelah,
Chr. Eber, Peleg, Reu,
Chr. Serug, Nahor, Terah,
Chr. Abram (the same is Abraham).
Chr. The sons of Abraham: Isaac and Ishmael.
Chr. These are their generations: the firstborn of Ishmael, Nebaioth, then Kedar,  Adbeel,  Mibsam,
Chr. Mishma,  Dumah, Massa, Hadad,  Tema,
Chr. Jetur, Naphish,  Kedemah. These are the sons of Ishmael.
Chr. And the sons of Keturah, Abraham's concubine: she bore Zimran,  Jokshan,  Medan,  Midian,  Ishbak,  Shuah. And the sons of Jokshan: Sheba,  Dedan.
Chr. And the sons of Midian: Ephah,  Epher,  Hanoch,  Abida,  Eldaah. All these were the sons of Keturah.
Chr. And Abraham begot Isaac. The sons of Isaac: Esau and Israel.
Chr. The sons of Esau: Eliphaz, Reuel,  Jeush,  Jalam,  Korah.
Chr. The sons of Eliphaz: Teman,  Omar, Zephi,  Gatam, Kenaz,  Timna,  Amalek.
Chr. The sons of Reuel: Nahath, Zerah, Shammah,  Mizzah.
Chr. And the sons of Seir: Lotan,  Shobal,  Zibeon,  Anah,  Dishon,  Ezer,  Dishan.
Chr. And the sons of Lotan: Hori,  Homam. And Timna was Lotan's sister.
Chr. The sons of Shobal: Alian,  Manahath,  Ebal, Shephi,  Onam. And the sons of Zibeon: Aiah,  Anah.
Chr. The sons of Anah: Dishon. And the sons of Dishon: Hamran,  Eshban,  Ithran,  Cheran.
Chr. The sons of Ezer: Bilhan,  Zaavan, Jaakan. The sons of Dishan: Uz,  Aran.
Chr. Now these are the kings that reigned in the land of Edom before any king reigned over the sons of Israel: Bela the son of Beor. And the name of his city was Dinhabah.
Chr. And Bela died,  Jobab the son of Zerah of Bozrah reigned in his stead.
Chr. And Jobab died,  Husham of the land of the Temanites reigned in his stead.
Chr. And Husham died,  Hadad the son of Bedad, who smote Midian in the field of Moab, reigned in his stead. And the name of his city was Avith.
Chr. And Hadad died,  Samlah of Masrekah reigned in his stead.
Chr. And Samlah died,  Shaul of Rehoboth by the River reigned in his stead.
Chr. And Shaul died,  Baal-hanan the son of Achbor reigned in his stead.
Chr. And Baal-hanan died,  Hadad reigned in his stead. And the name of his city was Pai,  his wife's name was Mehetabel, the daughter of Matred, the daughter of Me-zahab.
Chr. And Hadad died. And the chiefs of Edom were: chief Timna, chief Aliah, chief Jetheth,
Chr. chief Oholibamah, chief Elah, chief Pinon,
Chr. chief Kenaz, chief Teman, chief Mibzar,
Chr. chief Magdiel, chief Iram. These are the chiefs of Edom.
Chr. These are the sons of Israel: Reuben, Simeon, Levi,  Judah, Issachar,  Zebulun,
Chr. Dan, Joseph,  Benjamin, Naphtali, Gad,  Asher.
Chr. The sons of Judah: Er,  Onan,  Shelah, which three were born to him of Shua's daughter the Canaanitess. And Er, Judah's firstborn, was wicked in the sight of Jehovah,  he killed him.
Chr. And Tamar his daughter-in-law bore for him Perez and Zerah. All the sons of Judah were five.
Chr. The sons of Perez: Hezron,  Hamul.
Chr. And the sons of Zerah: Zimri,  Ethan,  Heman,  Calcol,  Dara; five of them in all.
Chr. And the sons of Carmi: Achar, the troubler of Israel who committed a trespass in the devoted thing.
Chr. And the sons of Ethan: Azariah.
Chr. The sons also of Hezron who were born to him: Jerahmeel,  Ram,  Chelubai.
Chr. And Ram begot Amminadab,  Amminadab begot Nahshon, ruler of the sons of Judah.
Chr. And Nahshon begot Salmon,  Salmon begot Boaz,
Chr. and Boaz begot Obed,  Obed begot Jesse,
Chr. and Jesse begot his firstborn Eliab,  Abinadab the second,  Shimea the third,
Chr. Nethanel the fourth, Raddai the fifth,
Chr. Ozem the sixth, David the seventh.
Chr. And their sisters were Zeruiah and Abigail. And the sons of Zeruiah: Abishai,  Joab,  Asahel, three.
Chr. And Abigail bore Amasa. And the father of Amasa was Jether the Ishmaelite.
Chr. And Caleb the son of Hezron begot sons of Azubah his wife,  of Jerioth. And these were her sons: Jesher,  Shobab,  Ardon.
Chr. And Azubah died,  Caleb took to him Ephrath, who bore for him Hur.
Chr. And Hur begot Uri,  Uri begot Bezalel.
Chr. And afterward Hezron went in to the daughter of Machir the father of Gilead, whom he took to wife when he was sixty years old,  she bore for him Segub.
Chr. And Segub begot Jair, who had twenty-three cities in the land of Gilead.
Chr. And Geshur and Aram took the towns of Jair from them, with Kenath,  the villages of it, even sixty cities. All these were the sons of Machir the father of Gilead.
Chr. And after that Hezron was dead in Caleb-ephrathah, then Abijah, Hezron's wife bore for him Ashhur the father of Tekoa.
Chr. And the sons of Jerahmeel the firstborn of Hezron were Ram the firstborn,  Bunah,  Oren,  Ozem, Ahijah.
Chr. And Jerahmeel had another wife, whose name was Atarah; she was the mother of Onam.
Chr. And the sons of Ram the firstborn of Jerahmeel were Maaz,  Jamin,  Eker.
Chr. And the sons of Onam were Shammai,  Jada. And the sons of Shammai: Nadab,  Abishur.
Chr. And the name of the wife of Abishur was Abihail,  she bore for him Ahban,  Molid.
Chr. And the sons of Nadab: Seled,  Appaim; but Seled died without sons.
Chr. And the sons of Appaim: Ishi. And the sons of Ishi: Sheshan. And the sons of Sheshan: Ahlai.
Chr. And the sons of Jada the brother of Shammai: Jether,  Jonathan; and Jether died without sons.
Chr. And the sons of Jonathan: Peleth,  Zaza. These were the sons of Jerahmeel.
Chr. Now Sheshan had no sons,  daughters. And Sheshan had a servant, an Egyptian, whose name was Jarha.
Chr. And Sheshan gave his daughter to Jarha his servant to wife,  she bore for him Attai.
Chr. And Attai begot Nathan,  Nathan begot Zabad,
Chr. and Zabad begot Ephlal,  Ephlal begot Obed,
Chr. and Obed begot Jehu,  Jehu begot Azariah,
Chr. and Azariah begot Helez,  Helez begot Eleasah,
Chr. and Eleasah begot Sismai,  Sismai begot Shallum,
Chr. and Shallum begot Jekamiah,  Jekamiah begot Elishama.
Chr. And the sons of Caleb the brother of Jerahmeel were Mesha his firstborn, who was the father of Ziph,  the sons of Mareshah the father of Hebron.
Chr. And the sons of Hebron: Korah,  Tappuah,  Rekem,  Shema.
Chr. And Shema begot Raham, the father of Jorkeam,  Rekem begot Shammai.
Chr. And the son of Shammai was Maon,  Maon was the father of Beth-zur.
Chr. And Ephah, Caleb's concubine, bore Haran,  Moza,  Gazez. And Haran begot Gazez.
Chr. And the sons of Jahdai: Regem,  Jothan,  Geshan,  Pelet,  Ephah,  Shaaph.
Chr. Maacah, Caleb's concubine, bore Sheber and Tirhanah.
Chr. She also bore Shaaph the father of Madmannah, Sheva the father of Machbena,  the father of Gibea. And the daughter of Caleb was Achsah.
Chr. These were the sons of Caleb. The sons of Hur, the firstborn of Ephrathah: Shobal the father of Kiriath-jearim,
Chr. Salma the father of Bethlehem, Hareph the father of Beth-gader.
Chr. And Shobal the father of Kiriath-jearim had sons: Haroeh, half of the Menuhothites,
Chr. and the families of Kiriath-jearim: The Ithrites,  the Puthites,  the Shumathites,  the Mishraites; of them came the Zorathites and the Eshtaolites.
Chr. The sons of Salma: Bethlehem,  the Netophathites, Atroth-beth-joab,  half of the Manahathites, the Zorites.
Chr. And the families of scribes who dwelt at Jabez: the Tirathites, the Shimeathites, the Sucathites. These are the Kenites who came of Hammath, the father of the house of Rechab.
Chr. Now these were the sons of David who were born to him in Hebron: the firstborn, Amnon, of Ahinoam the Jezreelitess; the second, Daniel, of Abigail the Carmelitess;
Chr. the third, Absalom the son of Maacah the daughter of Talmai king of Geshur; the fourth, Adonijah the son of Haggith;
Chr. the fifth, Shephatiah of Abital; the sixth, Ithream by Eglah his wife.
Chr. Six were born to him in Hebron,  he reigned there seven years and six months. And in Jerusalem he reigned thirty-three years.
Chr. And these were born to him in Jerusalem: Shimea,  Shobab,  Nathan,  Solomon, four, of Bathsheba the daughter of Ammiel;
Chr. and Ibhar,  Elishama,  Eliphelet,
Chr. and Nogah,  Nepheg,  Japhia,
Chr. and Elishama,  Eliada,  Eliphelet, nine.
Chr. All these were the sons of David, besides the sons of the concubines. And Tamar was their sister.
Chr. And Solomon's son was Rehoboam, Abijah his son, Asa his son, Jehoshaphat his son,
Chr. Joram his son, Ahaziah his son, Joash his son,
Chr. Amaziah his son, Azariah his son, Jotham his son,
Chr. Ahaz his son, Hezekiah his son, Manasseh his son,
Chr. Amon his son, Josiah his son.
Chr. And the sons of Josiah: the firstborn Johanan, the second Jehoiakim, the third Zedekiah, the fourth Shallum.
Chr. And the sons of Jehoiakim: Jeconiah his son, Zedekiah his son.
Chr. And the sons of Jeconiah, the captive: Shealtiel his son,
Chr. and Malchiram,  Pedaiah,  Shenazzar, Jekamiah, Hoshama,  Nedabiah.
Chr. And the sons of Pedaiah: Zerubbabel,  Shimei. And the sons of Zerubbabel: Meshullam,  Hananiah; and Shelomith was their sister;
Chr. and Hashubah,  Ohel,  Berechiah,  Hasadiah, Jushab-hesed, five.
Chr. And the sons of Hananiah: Pelatiah,  Jeshaiah; the sons of Rephaiah, the sons of Arnan, the sons of Obadiah, the sons of Shecaniah.
Chr. And the sons of Shecaniah: Shemaiah. And the sons of Shemaiah: Hattush,  Igal,  Bariah,  Neariah,  Shaphat, six.
Chr. And the sons of Neariah: Elioenai,  Hizkiah,  Azrikam, three.
Chr. And the sons of Elioneai: Hodaviah,  Eliashib,  Pelaiah,  Akkub,  Johanan,  Delaiah,  Anani, seven.
Chr. The sons of Judah: Perez, Hezron,  Carmi,  Hur,  Shobal.
Chr. And Reaiah the son of Shobal begot Jahath. And Jahath begot Ahumai and Lahad. These are the families of the Zorathites.
Chr. And these were the sons of the father of Etam: Jezreel,  Ishma,  Idbash; and the name of their sister was Hazzelelponi;
Chr. and Penuel the father of Gedor,  Ezer the father of Hushah. These are the sons of Hur, the firstborn of Ephrathah, the father of Bethlehem.
Chr. And Ashhur the father of Tekoa had two wives, Helah and Naarah.
Chr. And Naarah bore for him Ahuzzam,  Hepher,  Temeni,  Haahashtari. These were the sons of Naarah.
Chr. And the sons of Helah were Zereth, Izhar,  Ethnan.
Chr. And Hakkoz begot Anub,  Zobebah,  the families of Aharhel the son of Harum.
Chr. And Jabez was more honorable than his brothers. And his mother called his name Jabez, saying, Because I bore him with sorrow.
Chr. And Jabez called on the God of Israel, saying, Oh that thou would bless me indeed,  enlarge my border,  that thy hand might be with me,  that thou would keep me from evil, that it not be to my sorrow! And God granted him that which he requested.
Chr. And Chelub the brother of Shuhah begot Mehir, who was the father of Eshton.
Chr. And Eshton begot Beth-rapha,  Paseah,  Tehinnah the father of Ir-nahash. These are the men of Recah.
Chr. And the sons of Kenaz: Othniel,  Seraiah. And the sons of Othniel: Hathath.
Chr. And Meonothai begot Ophrah. And Seraiah begot Joab the father of Ge-harashim, for they were craftsmen.
Chr. And the sons of Caleb the son of Jephunneh: Iru, Elah,  Naam. And the sons of Elah: Kenaz.
Chr. And the sons of Jehallelel: Ziph,  Ziphah, Tiria,  Asarel.
Chr. And the sons of Ezrah: Jether,  Mered,  Epher,  Jalon. And she bore Miriam,  Shammai,  Ishbah the father of Eshtemoa.
Chr. And his wife the Jewess bore Jered the father of Gedor,  Heber the father of Soco,  Jekuthiel the father of Zanoah. And these are the sons of Bithiah the daughter of Pharaoh, whom Mered took.
Chr. And the sons of the wife of Hodiah, the sister of Naham, were the fathers of Keilah the Garmite,  Eshtemoa the Maacathite.
Chr. And the sons of Shimon: Amnon,  Rinnah, Ben-hanan,  Tilon. And the sons of Ishi: Zoheth,  Ben-zoheth.
Chr. The sons of Shelah the son of Judah: Er the father of Lecah,  Laadah the father of Mareshah,  the families of the house of those who worked fine linen, of the house of Ashbea;
Chr. and Jokim,  the men of Cozeba,  Joash,  Saraph, who had dominion in Moab,  Jashubilehem. And the records are ancient.
Chr. These were the potters,  the inhabitants of Netaim and Gederah. They dwelt there with the king for his work.
Chr. The sons of Simeon: Nemuel,  Jamin, Jarib, Zerah, Shaul;
Chr. Shallum his son, Mibsam his son, Mishma his son.
Chr. And the sons of Mishma: Hammuel his son, Zaccur his son, Shimei his son.
Chr. And Shimei had sixteen sons and six daughters,  his brothers did not have many sons, neither did all their family multiply like the sons of Judah.
Chr. And they dwelt at Beersheba,  Moladah,  Hazarshual,
Chr. and at Bilhah,  at Ezem,  at Tolad,
Chr. and at Bethuel,  at Hormah,  at Ziklag,
Chr. and at Beth-marcaboth,  Hazar-susim,  at Beth-biri,  at Shaaraim. These were their cities to the reign of David.
Chr. And their villages were Etam,  Ain, Rimmon,  Tochen,  Ashan, five cities.
Chr. And all their villages that were round about the same cities, to Baal. These were their habitations,  they have their genealogy.
Chr. And Meshobab,  Jamlech,  Joshah the son of Amaziah,
Chr. and Joel,  Jehu the son of Joshibiah, the son of Seraiah, the son of Asiel,
Chr. and Elioenai,  Jaakobah,  Jeshohaiah,  Asaiah,  Adiel,  Jesimiel,  Benaiah,
Chr. and Ziza the son of Shiphi, the son of Allon, the son of Jedaiah, the son of Shimri, the son of Shemaiah-
Chr. these mentioned by name were rulers in their families,  their fathers' houses increased greatly.
Chr. And they went to the entrance of Gedor, even to the east side of the valley, to seek pasture for their flocks.
Chr. And they found lush and good pasture,  the land was wide and quiet and peaceable, for those who dwelt there formerly were of Ham.
Chr. And these written by name came in the days of Hezekiah king of Judah,  smote their tents,  the Meunim who were found there,  destroyed them utterly to this day,  dwelt in their stead because there was pasture there for their flocks.
Chr. And some of them, even of the sons of Simeon, five hundred men, went to mount Seir, having for their captains Pelatiah,  Neariah,  Rephaiah,  Uzziel, the sons of Ishi.
Chr. And they smote the remnant of the Amalekites who escaped,  have dwelt there to this day.
Chr. And the sons of Reuben the firstborn of Israel (for he was the firstborn, , inasmuch as he defiled his father's couch, his birthright was given to the sons of Joseph the son of Israel,  so the genealogy is not to be reckoned after the birthright.
Chr. Now Judah prevailed above his brothers,  the ruler came from him,  the birthright was Joseph's),
Chr. the sons of Reuben the firstborn of Israel: Hanoch,  Pallu, Hezron,  Carmi.
Chr. The sons of Joel: Shemaiah his son, Gog his son, Shimei his son,
Chr. Micah his son, Reaiah his son, Baal his son,
Chr. Beerah his son, whom Tilgath-pilneser king of Assyria carried away captive. He was ruler of the Reubenites.
Chr. And his brothers by their families, when the genealogy of their generations was reckoned: the chief, Jeiel,  Zechariah,
Chr. and Bela the son of Azaz, the son of Shema, the son of Joel, who dwelt in Aroer, even to Nebo and Baal-meon.
Chr. And eastward he dwelt even to the entrance of the wilderness from the river Euphrates, because their cattle were multiplied in the land of Gilead.
Chr. And in the days of Saul they made war with the Hagrites, who fell by their hand,  they dwelt in their tents throughout all the land east of Gilead.
Chr. And the sons of Gad dwelt opposite them, in the land of Bashan to Salecah:
Chr. Joel the chief,  Shapham the second,  Janai,  Shaphat in Bashan.
Chr. And their brothers of their fathers' houses: Michael,  Meshullam,  Sheba,  Jorai,  Jacan,  Zia,  Eber, seven.
Chr. These were the sons of Abihail, the son of Huri, the son of Jaroah, the son of Gilead, the son of Michael, the son of Jeshishai, the son of Jahdo, the son of Buz.
Chr. Ahi the son of Abdiel, the son of Guni, was chief of their fathers' houses.
Chr. And they dwelt in Gilead in Bashan,  in its towns,  in all the suburbs of Sharon, as far as their borders.
Chr. All these were reckoned by genealogies in the days of Jotham king of Judah,  in the days of Jeroboam king of Israel.
Chr. The sons of Reuben,  the Gadites,  the half-tribe of Manasseh, of valiant men, men able to bear buckler and sword,  to shoot with bow,  skilful in war, were forty-four thousand seven hundred and sixty, who were able to go forth to war.
Chr. And they made war with the Hagrites, with Jetur,  Naphish,  Nodab.
Chr. And they were helped against them,  the Hagrites were delivered into their hand,  all that were with them, for they cried to God in the battle,  he was entreated by them because they put their trust in him.
Chr. And they took away their cattle: of their camels fifty thousand,  of sheep two hundred and fifty thousand,  of donkeys two thousand,  of men a hundred thousand.
Chr. For there fell many slain, because the war was of God. And they dwelt in their stead until the captivity.
Chr. And the sons of the half-tribe of Manasseh dwelt in the land. They increased from Bashan to Baal-hermon and Senir and mount Hermon.
Chr. And these were the heads of their fathers' houses: even Epher,  Ishi,  Eliel,  Azriel,  Jeremiah,  Hodaviah,  Jahdiel, mighty men of valor, famous men, heads of their fathers' houses.
Chr. And they trespassed against the God of their fathers,  played the harlot after the gods of the peoples of the land, whom God destroyed before them.
Chr. And the God of Israel stirred up the spirit of Pul king of Assyria,  the spirit of Tilgath-pilneser king of Assyria,  he carried them away, even the Reubenites,  the Gadites,  the half-tribe of Manasseh,  brought them to Halah,  Habor,  Hara,  to the river of Gozan to this day.
Chr. The sons of Levi: Gershon, Kohath,  Merari.
Chr. And the sons of Kohath: Amram, Izhar,  Hebron,  Uzziel.
Chr. And the sons of Amram: Aaron,  Moses,  Miriam. And the sons of Aaron: Nadab,  Abihu, Eleazar,  Ithamar.
Chr. Eleazar begot Phinehas, Phinehas begot Abishua,
Chr. and Abishua begot Bukki,  Bukki begot Uzzi,
Chr. and Uzzi begot Zerahiah,  Zerahiah begot Meraioth,
Chr. Meraioth begot Amariah,  Amariah begot Ahitub,
Chr. and Ahitub begot Zadok,  Zadok begot Ahimaaz,
Chr. and Ahimaaz begot Azariah,  Azariah begot Johanan,
Chr. and Johanan begot Azariah, (he it is who executed the priest's office in the house that Solomon built in Jerusalem),
Chr. and Azariah begot Amariah,  Amariah begot Ahitub,
Chr. and Ahitub begot Zadok,  Zadok begot Shallum,
Chr. and Shallum begot Hilkiah,  Hilkiah begot Azariah,
Chr. and Azariah begot Seraiah,  Seraiah begot Jehozadak.
Chr. And Jehozadak went into captivity when Jehovah carried away Judah and Jerusalem by the hand of Nebuchadnezzar.
Chr. The sons of Levi: Gershom, Kohath,  Merari.
Chr. And these are the names of the sons of Gershom: Libni and Shimei.
Chr. And the sons of Kohath were Amram,  Izhar,  Hebron,  Uzziel.
Chr. The sons of Merari: Mahli and Mushi. And these are the families of the Levites according to their fathers.
Chr. Of Gershom: Libni his son, Jahath his son, Zimmah his son,
Chr. Joah his son, Iddo his son, Zerah his son, Jeatherai his son.
Chr. The sons of Kohath: Amminadab his son, Korah his son, Assir his son,
Chr. Elkanah his son,  Ebiasaph his son,  Assir his son,
Chr. Tahath his son, Uriel his son, Uzziah his son,  Shaul his son.
Chr. And the sons of Elkanah: Amasai,  Ahimoth.
Chr. As for Elkanah, the sons of Elkanah: Zophai his son,  Nahath his son,
Chr. Eliab his son, Jeroham his son, Elkanah his son.
Chr. And the sons of Samuel: the firstborn Joel,  the second Abijah.
Chr. The sons of Merari: Mahli, Libni his son, Shimei his son, Uzzah his son,
Chr. Shimea his son, Haggiah his son, Asaiah his son.
Chr. And these are those whom David set over the service of song in the house of Jehovah, after the ark had rest.
Chr. And they ministered with song before the tabernacle of the tent of meeting until Solomon had built the house of Jehovah in Jerusalem,  they served in their office according to their order.
Chr. And these are those who served,  their sons. Of the sons of the Kohathites: Heman the singer, the son of Joel, the son of Samuel,
Chr. the son of Elkanah, the son of Jeroham, the son of Eliel, the son of Toah,
Chr. the son of Zuph, the son of Elkanah, the son of Mahath, the son of Amasai,
Chr. the son of Elkanah, the son of Joel, the son of Azariah, the son of Zephaniah,
Chr. the son of Tahath, the son of Assir, the son of Ebiasaph, the son of Korah,
Chr. the son of Izhar, the son of Kohath, the son of Levi, the son of Israel.
Chr. And his brother Asaph, who stood on his right hand, even Asaph the son of Berechiah, the son of Shimea,
Chr. the son of Michael, the son of Baaseiah, the son of Malchijah,
Chr. the son of Ethni, the son of Zerah, the son of Adaiah,
Chr. the son of Ethan, the son of Zimmah, the son of Shimei,
Chr. the son of Jahath, the son of Gershom, the son of Levi.
Chr. And on the left hand their brothers the sons of Merari: Ethan the son of Kishi, the son of Abdi, the son of Malluch,
Chr. the son of Hashabiah, the son of Amaziah, the son of Hilkiah,
Chr. the son of Amzi, the son of Bani, the son of Shemer,
Chr. the son of Mahli, the son of Mushi, the son of Merari, the son of Levi.
Chr. And their brothers the Levites were appointed for all the service of the tabernacle of the house of God.
Chr. But Aaron and his sons offered upon the altar of burnt offering,  upon the altar of incense, for all the work of the most holy place,  to make atonement for Israel, according to all that Moses the servant of God had commanded.
Chr. And these are the sons of Aaron: Eleazar his son, Phinehas his son, Abishua his son,
Chr. Bukki his son, Uzzi his son, Zerahiah his son,
Chr. Meraioth his son, Amariah his son, Ahitub his son,
Chr. Zadok his son, Ahimaaz his son.
Chr. Now these are their dwelling-places according to their encampments in their borders, to the sons of Aaron, of the families of the Kohathites (for theirs was the first lot),
Chr. to them they gave Hebron in the land of Judah,  the suburbs of it round about it.
Chr. But the fields of the city,  the villages of it, they gave to Caleb the son of Jephunneh.
Chr. And to the sons of Aaron they gave the cities of refuge, Hebron, Libnah also with its suburbs,  Jattir,  Eshtemoa with its suburbs,
Chr. and Hilen with its suburbs, Debir with its suburbs,
Chr. and Ashan with its suburbs,  Beth-shemesh with its suburbs.
Chr. And out of the tribe of Benjamin, Geba with its suburbs,  Allemeth with its suburbs,  Anathoth with its suburbs. All their cities throughout their families were thirteen cities.
Chr. And to the rest of the sons of Kohath were given by lot, out of the family of the tribe, out of the half-tribe, the half of Manasseh, ten cities.
Chr. And to the sons of Gershom, according to their families, out of the tribe of Issachar,  out of the tribe of Asher,  out of the tribe of Naphtali,  out of the tribe of Manasseh in Bashan, thirteen cities.
Chr. To the sons of Merari were given by lot, according to their families, out of the tribe of Reuben,  out of the tribe of Gad,  out of the tribe of Zebulun, twelve cities.
Chr. And the sons of Israel gave to the Levites the cities with their suburbs.
Chr. And they gave by lot out of the tribe of the sons of Judah,  out of the tribe of the sons of Simeon,  out of the tribe of the sons of Benjamin, these cities which are mentioned by name.
Chr. And some of the families of the sons of Kohath had cities of their borders out of the tribe of Ephraim.
Chr. And they gave to them the cities of refuge, Shechem in the hill-country of Ephraim with its suburbs, also Gezer with its suburbs,
Chr. and Jokmeam with its suburbs,  Beth-horon with its suburbs,
Chr. and Aijalon with its suburbs,  Gath-rimmon with its suburbs.
Chr. And out of the half-tribe of Manasseh, Aner with its suburbs,  Bileam with its suburbs, for the rest of the family of the sons of Kohath.
Chr. To the sons of Gershom were given out of the family of the half-tribe of Manasseh, Golan in Bashan with its suburbs,  Ashtaroth with its suburbs.
Chr. And out of the tribe of Issachar, Kedesh with its suburbs, Daberath with its suburbs,
Chr. and Ramoth with its suburbs,  Anem with its suburbs.
Chr. And out of the tribe of Asher, Mashal with its suburbs,  Abdon with its suburbs,
Chr. and Hukok with its suburbs,  Rehob with its suburbs.
Chr. And out of the tribe of Naphtali, Kedesh in Galilee with its suburbs,  Hammon with its suburbs,  Kiriathaim with its suburbs.
Chr. To the rest of the Levites, the sons of Merari, were given out of the tribe of Zebulun, Rimmono with its suburbs, Tabor with its suburbs.
Chr. And beyond the Jordan at Jericho, on the east side of the Jordan, were given them out of the tribe of Reuben, Bezer in the wilderness with its suburbs,  Jahzah with its suburbs,
Chr. and Kedemoth with its suburbs,  Mephaath with its suburbs.
Chr. And out of the tribe of Gad, Ramoth in Gilead with its suburbs,  Mahanaim with its suburbs,
Chr. and Heshbon with its suburbs,  Jazer with its suburbs.
Chr. And of the sons of Issachar: Tola,  Puah, Jashub,  Shimron, four.
Chr. And the sons of Tola: Uzzi,  Rephaiah,  Jeriel,  Jahmai,  Ibsam,  Shemuel, heads of their fathers' houses, namely, of Tola, mighty men of valor in their generations. Their number in the days of David was twenty-two thousand and six hundred.
Chr. And the sons of Uzzi: Izrahiah. And the sons of Izrahiah: Michael,  Obadiah,  Joel, Isshiah, five; all of them chief men.
Chr. And with them, by their generations, after their fathers' houses, were bands of the army for war, thirty-six thousand, for they had many wives and sons.
Chr. And their brothers among all the families of Issachar, mighty men of valor, reckoned in all by genealogy, were eighty-seven thousand.
Chr. The sons of Benjamin: Bela,  Becher,  Jediael, three.
Chr. And the sons of Bela: Ezbon,  Uzzi,  Uzziel,  Jerimoth,  Iri, five; heads of fathers' houses, mighty men of valor. And they were reckoned by genealogy twenty-two thousand and thirty-four.
Chr. And the sons of Becher: Zemirah,  Joash,  Eliezer,  Elioenai,  Omri,  Jeremoth,  Abijah,  Anathoth,  Alemeth. All these were the sons of Becher.
Chr. And they were reckoned by genealogy, after their generations, heads of their fathers' houses, mighty men of valor, twenty thousand and two hundred.
Chr. And the sons of Jediael: Bilhan. And the sons of Bilhan: Jeush,  Benjamin,  Ehud,  Chenaanah,  Zethan,  Tarshish,  Ahishahar.
Chr. All these were sons of Jediael, according to the heads of their fathers, mighty men of valor, seventeen thousand and two hundred, who were able to go forth in the army for war.
Chr. Also the Shuppim,  the Huppim, the sons of Ir,  the Hushim, the sons of Aher.
Chr. The sons of Naphtali: Jahziel,  Guni,  Jezer,  Shallum, the sons of Bilhah.
Chr. The sons of Manasseh: Asriel, whom his concubine the Aramitess bore. She bore Machir the father of Gilead.
Chr. And Machir took a wife of Huppim and Shuppim, whose sister's name was Maacah,  the name of the second was Zelophehad. And Zelophehad had daughters.
Chr. And Maacah the wife of Machir bore a son,  she called his name Peresh. And the name of his brother was Sheresh,  his sons were Ulam and Rakem.
Chr. And the son of Ulam: Bedan. These were the sons of Gilead the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh.
Chr. And his sister Hammolecheth bore Ishhod,  Abiezer,  Mahlah.
Chr. And the sons of Shemida were Ahian,  Shechem,  Likhi,  Aniam.
Chr. And the sons of Ephraim: Shuthelah,  Bered his son,  Tahath his son,  Eleadah his son,  Tahath his son,
Chr. and Zabad his son,  Shuthelah his son,  Ezer,  Elead, whom the men of Gath that were born in the land killed, because they came down to take away their cattle.
Chr. And Ephraim their father mourned many days,  his brothers came to comfort him.
Chr. And he went in to his wife,  she conceived,  bore a son,  he called his name Beriah, because it went evil with his house.
Chr. And his daughter was Sheerah, who built Beth-horon the lower and the upper,  Uzzen-sheerah.
Chr. And Rephah was his son,  Resheph,  Telah his son,  Tahan his son,
Chr. Ladan his son, Ammihud his son, Elishama his son,
Chr. Nun his son, Joshua his son.
Chr. And their possessions and habitations were Bethel and the towns of it,  eastward Naaran,  westward Gezer, with the towns of it, also Shechem and the towns of it, to Azzah and the towns of it,
Chr. and by the borders of the sons of Manasseh, Beth-shean and its towns, Taanach and its towns, Megiddo and its towns, Dor and its towns. In these dwelt the sons of Joseph the son of Israel.
Chr. The sons of Asher: Imnah,  Ishvah,  Ishvi,  Beriah,  Serah their sister.
Chr. And the sons of Beriah: Heber,  Malchiel, who was the father of Birzaith.
Chr. And Heber begot Japhlet,  Shomer,  Hotham,  Shua their sister.
Chr. And the sons of Japhlet: Pasach,  Bimhal,  Ashvath. These are the sons of Japhlet.
Chr. And the sons of Shemer: Ahi,  Rohgah, Jehubbah,  Aram.
Chr. And the sons of Helem his brother: Zophah,  Imna,  Shelesh,  Amal.
Chr. The sons of Zophah: Suah,  Harnepher,  Shual,  Beri,  Imrah,
Chr. Bezer,  Hod,  Shamma,  Shilshah,  Ithran,  Beera.
Chr. And the sons of Jether: Jephunneh,  Pispa,  Ara.
Chr. And the sons of Ulla: Arah,  Hanniel,  Rizia.
Chr. All these were the sons of Asher, heads of the fathers' houses, choice and mighty men of valor, chief of the rulers. And the number of them reckoned by genealogy for service in war was twenty-six thousand men.
Chr. And Benjamin begot Bela his firstborn, Ashbel the second,  Aharah the third,
Chr. Nohah the fourth,  Rapha the fifth.
Chr. And Bela had sons: Addar,  Gera,  Abihud,
Chr. and Abishua,  Naaman,  Ahoah,
Chr. and Gera,  Shephuphan,  Huram.
Chr. And these are the sons of Ehud. These are the heads of fathers of the inhabitants of Geba,  they carried them captive to Manahath:
Chr. Naaman,  Ahijah,  Gera. He carried them captive,  he begot Uzza and Ahihud.
Chr. And Shaharaim begot sons in the field of Moab after he had sent them away; Hushim and Baara were his wives.
Chr. And he begot of Hodesh his wife, Jobab,  Zibia,  Mesha,  Malcam,
Chr. and Jeuz,  Shachia,  Mirmah. These were his sons, heads of fathers.
Chr. And of Hushim he begot Abitub and Elpaal.
Chr. And the sons of Elpaal: Eber,  Misham,  Shemed, who built Ono and Lod, with the towns of it,
Chr. and Beriah,  Shema (who were heads of fathers of the inhabitants of Aijalon who put the inhabitants of Gath to flight)
Chr. and Ahio, Shashak,  Jeremoth,
Chr. and Zebadiah,  Arad,  Eder,
Chr. and Michael,  Ishpah,  Joha, the sons of Beriah,
Chr. and Zebadiah,  Meshullam,  Hizki,  Heber,
Chr. and Ishmerai,  Izliah,  Jobab, the sons of Elpaal,
Chr. and Jakim,  Zichri,  Zabdi,
Chr. and Elienai,  Zillethai,  Eliel,
Chr. and Adaiah,  Beraiah,  Shimrath, the sons of Shimei,
Chr. and Ishpan,  Eber,  Eliel,
Chr. and Abdon,  Zichri,  Hanan,
Chr. and Hananiah,  Elam,  Anthothijah,
Chr. and Iphdeiah,  Penuel, the sons of Shashak,
Chr. and Shamsherai,  Shehariah,  Athaliah,
Chr. and Jaareshiah,  Elijah,  Zichri, the sons of Jeroham.
Chr. These were heads of fathers throughout their generations, chief men; these dwelt in Jerusalem.
Chr. And in Gibeon there dwelt the father of Gibeon Jeiel, whose wife's name was Maacah,
Chr. and his firstborn son Abdon,  Zur,  Kish,  Baal,  Nadab,
Chr. and Gedor,  Ahio,  Zecher.
Chr. And Mikloth begot Shimeah. And they also dwelt with their brothers in Jerusalem, opposite their brothers.
Chr. And Ner begot Kish,  Kish begot Saul,  Saul begot Jonathan,  Malchi-shua,  Abinadab,  Eshbaal.
Chr. And the son of Jonathan was Merib-baal,  Merib-baal begot Micah.
Chr. And the sons of Micah: Pithon,  Melech,  Tarea,  Ahaz.
Chr. And Ahaz begot Jehoaddah,  Jehoaddah begot Alemeth,  Azmaveth,  Zimri; and Zimri begot Moza,
Chr. and Moza begot Binea. Raphah was his son, Eleasah his son, Azel his son.
Chr. And Azel had six sons whose names are these: Azrikam, Bocheru,  Ishmael,  Sheariah,  Obadiah,  Hanan. All these were the sons of Azel.
Chr. And the sons of Eshek his brother: Ulam his firstborn, Jeush the second,  Eliphelet the third.
Chr. And the sons of Ulam were mighty men of valor, archers,  had many sons,  sons' sons, a hundred and fifty. All these were of the sons of Benjamin.
Chr. So all Israel were reckoned by genealogies. And, behold, they are written in the book of the kings of Israel. And Judah was carried away captive to Babylon for their transgression.
Chr. Now the first inhabitants who dwelt in their possessions in their cities were Israelites, the priests, the Levites,  the Nethinim.
Chr. And in Jerusalem dwelt of the sons of Judah,  of the sons of Benjamin,  of the sons of Ephraim and Manasseh:
Chr. Uthai the son of Ammihud, the son of Omri, the son of Imri, the son of Bani, of the sons of Perez the son of Judah.
Chr. And of the Shilonites: Asaiah the firstborn,  his sons.
Chr. And of the sons of Zerah: Jeuel,  their brothers, six hundred and ninety.
Chr. And of the sons of Benjamin: Sallu the son of Meshullam, the son of Hodaviah, the son of Hassenuah,
Chr. and Ibneiah the son of Jeroham,  Elah the son of Uzzi, the son of Michri,  Meshullam the son of Shephatiah, the son of Reuel, the son of Ibnijah,
Chr. and their brothers, according to their generations, nine hundred and fifty-six. All these men were heads of fathers by their fathers' houses.
Chr. And of the priests: Jedaiah,  Jehoiarib, Jachin,
Chr. and Azariah the son of Hilkiah, the son of Meshullam, the son of Zadok, the son of Meraioth, the son of Ahitub, the ruler of the house of God,
Chr. and Adaiah the son of Jeroham, the son of Pashhur, the son of Malchijah,  Maasai the son of Adiel, the son of Jahzerah, the son of Meshullam, the son of Meshillemith, the son of Immer,
Chr. and their brothers, heads of their fathers' houses, a thousand and seven hundred and sixty, very able men for the work of the service of the house of God.
Chr. And of the Levites: Shemaiah the son of Hasshub, the son of Azrikam, the son of Hashabiah, of the sons of Merari,
Chr. and Bakbakkar, Heresh,  Galal,  Mattaniah the son of Mica, the son of Zichri, the son of Asaph,
Chr. and Obadiah the son of Shemaiah, the son of Galal, the son of Jeduthun,  Berechiah the son of Asa, the son of Elkanah, who dwelt in the villages of the Netophathites.
Chr. And the porters: Shallum,  Akkub,  Talmon,  Ahiman,  their brothers (Shallum was the chief),
Chr. who formerly served in the king's gate eastward. They were the porters for the camp of the sons of Levi.
Chr. And Shallum the son of Kore, the son of Ebiasaph, the son of Korah,  his brothers, of his father's house, the Korahites, were over the work of the service, keepers of the thresholds of the tent. And their fathers had been over the camp of Jehovah, keepers of the entry.
Chr. And Phinehas the son of Eleazar was ruler over them in time past,  Jehovah was with him.
Chr. Zechariah the son of Meshelemiah was porter of the door of the tent of meeting.
Chr. All these who were chosen to be porters in the thresholds were two hundred and twelve. These were reckoned by genealogy in their villages, whom David and Samuel the seer ordained in their office of trust.
Chr. So they and their sons had the oversight of the gates of the house of Jehovah, even the house of the tent, by wards.
Chr. On the four sides were the porters, toward the east, west, north,  south.
Chr. And their brothers, in their villages, were to come in every seven days from time to time to be with them;
Chr. for the four chief porters, who were Levites, were in an office of trust,  were over the chambers and over the treasuries in the house of God.
Chr. And they lodged round about the house of God, because the charge of it was upon them,  to them pertained the opening of it morning by morning.
Chr. And certain of them had charge of the vessels of service, for by count were these brought in,  by count were these taken out.
Chr. Some of them were also appointed over the furniture,  over all the vessels of the sanctuary,  over the fine flour,  the wine,  the oil,  the frankincense,  the spices.
Chr. And some of the sons of the priests prepared the confection of the spices.
Chr. And Mattithiah, one of the Levites, who was the firstborn of Shallum the Korahite, had the office of trust over the things that were baked in pans.
Chr. And some of their brothers, of the sons of the Kohathites, were over the showbread to prepare it every sabbath.
Chr. And these are the singers, heads of fathers of the Levites, who dwelt in the chambers and were free from other service, for they were employed in their work day and night.
Chr. These were heads of fathers of the Levites, throughout their generations, chief men; these dwelt at Jerusalem.
Chr. And in Gibeon there dwelt the father of Gibeon, Jeiel, whose wife's name was Maacah,
Chr. and his firstborn son Abdon,  Zur,  Kish,  Baal,  Ner,  Nadab,
Chr. and Gedor,  Ahio,  Zechariah,  Mikloth.
Chr. And Mikloth begot Shimeam. And they also dwelt with their brothers in Jerusalem, opposite their brothers.
Chr. And Ner begot Kish,  Kish begot Saul,  Saul begot Jonathan,  Malchi-shua,  Abinadab,  Eshbaal.
Chr. And the son of Jonathan was Merib-baal,  Merib-baal begot Micah.
Chr. And the sons of Micah: Pithon,  Melech,  Tahrea,  Ahaz.
Chr. And Ahaz begot Jarah,  Jarah begot Alemeth,  Azmaveth,  Zimri; and Zimri begot Moza,
Chr. and Moza begot Binea,  Rephaiah his son, Eleasah his son, Azel his son.
Chr. And Azel had six sons, whose names are these: Azrikam, Bocheru,  Ishmael,  Sheariah,  Obadiah,  Hanan; these were the sons of Azel.
Chr. Now the Philistines fought against Israel. And the men of Israel fled from before the Philistines,  fell down slain in mount Gilboa.
Chr. And the Philistines followed hard after Saul and after his sons. And the Philistines killed Jonathan,  Abinadab,  Malchi-shua, the sons of Saul.
Chr. And the battle went hard against Saul,  the archers overtook him. And he was wounded because of the archers.
Chr. Then Saul said to his armor bearer, Draw thy sword,  thrust me through therewith, lest these uncircumcised come and abuse me. But his armor bearer would not, for he was very afraid. Therefore Saul took his sword,  fell upon it.
Chr. And when his armor bearer saw that Saul was dead, he likewise fell upon his sword,  died.
Chr. So Saul died,  his three sons. And all his house died together.
Chr. And when all the men of Israel who were in the valley saw that they fled,  that Saul and his sons were dead, they forsook their cities,  fled. And the Philistines came and dwelt in them.
Chr. And it came to pass on the morrow, when the Philistines came to strip the slain, that they found Saul and his sons fallen in mount Gilboa.
Chr. And they stripped him,  took his head,  his armor,  sent into the land of the Philistines round about to carry the news to their idols,  to the people.
Chr. And they put his armor in the house of their gods,  fastened his head in the house of Dagon.
Chr. And when all Jabesh-gilead heard all that the Philistines had done to Saul,
Chr. all the valiant men arose,  took away the body of Saul,  the bodies of his sons,  brought them to Jabesh,  buried their bones under the oak in Jabesh,  fasted seven days.
Chr. So Saul died for his trespass which he committed against Jehovah, because of the word of Jehovah, which he did not keep,  also because he asked counsel of a spiritist, to inquire thereby,
Chr. and did not inquire of Jehovah. Therefore he killed him,  turned the kingdom to David the son of Jesse.
Chr. Then all Israel gathered themselves to David to Hebron, saying, Behold, we are thy bone and thy flesh.
Chr. In times past, even when Saul was king, it was thou who led out and brought in Israel. And Jehovah thy God said to thee, Thou shall be shepherd of my people Israel,  thou shall be ruler over my people Israel.
Chr. So all the elders of Israel came to the king to Hebron. And David made a covenant with them in Hebron before Jehovah. And they anointed David king over Israel, according to the word of Jehovah by Samuel.
Chr. And David and all Israel went to Jerusalem (the same is Jebus),  the Jebusites, the inhabitants of the land, were there.
Chr. And the inhabitants of Jebus said to David, Thou shall not come in here. Nevertheless David took the stronghold of Zion; the same is the city of David.
Chr. And David said, Whoever smites the Jebusites first shall be chief and captain. And Joab the son of Zeruiah went up first,  was made chief.
Chr. And David dwelt in the stronghold. Therefore they called it the city of David.
Chr. And he built the city round about, from Millo even round about. And Joab repaired the rest of the city.
Chr. And David grew greater and greater, for Jehovah of hosts was with him.
Chr. Now these are the chief of the mighty men whom David had, who showed themselves strong with him in his kingdom, together with all Israel, to make him king, according to the word of Jehovah concerning Israel.
Chr. And this is the number of the mighty men whom David had: Jashobeam, the son of a Hachmonite, the chief of the thirty. He lifted up his spear against three hundred and killed them at one time.
Chr. And after him was Eleazar the son of Dodo, the Ahohite, who was one of the three mighty men.
Chr. He was with David at Pasdammim,  there the Philistines were gathered together to battle, where was a plot of ground full of barley. And the people fled from before the Philistines.
Chr. And they stood in the midst of the plot,  defended it,  killed the Philistines. And Jehovah saved them by a great victory.
Chr. And three of the thirty chief men went down to the rock to David into the cave of Adullam. And the army of the Philistines was encamped in the valley of Rephaim.
Chr. And David was then in the stronghold,  the garrison of the Philistines was then in Bethlehem.
Chr. And David longed,  said, Oh that a man would give me water to drink of the well of Bethlehem, which is by the gate!
Chr. And the three broke through the army of the Philistines,  drew water out of the well of Bethlehem, that was by the gate,  took it,  brought it to David. But David would not drink of it,  poured it out to Jehovah,
Chr. and said, My God forbid it of me, that I should do this. Shall I drink the blood of these men who have put their lives in jeopardy? For with the jeopardy of their lives they brought it. Therefore he would not drink it. These things the three mighty men did.
Chr. And Abishai, the brother of Joab, he was chief of the three, for he lifted up his spear against three hundred and killed them,  had a name among the three.
Chr. Of the three, he was more famous than the two,  was made their captain. However he did not attain to the first three.
Chr. Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, the son of a valiant man of Kabzeel, who had done mighty deeds, he killed the two sons of Ariel of Moab. He also went down and killed a lion in the midst of a pit in time of snow.
Chr. And he killed an Egyptian, a man of great stature, five cubits high. And in the Egyptian's hand was a spear like a weaver's beam. And he went down to him with a staff,  plucked the spear out of the Egyptian's hand,  killed him with his own spear.
Chr. These things Benaiah the son of Jehoiada did,  had a name among the three mighty men.
Chr. Behold, he was more famous than the thirty,  he did not attain to the first three. And David set him over his guard.
Chr. Also the mighty men of the armies: Asahel the brother of Joab, Elhanan the son of Dodo of Bethlehem,
Chr. Shammoth the Harorite, Helez the Pelonite,
Chr. Ira the son of Ikkesh the Tekoite, Abiezer the Anathothite,
Chr. Sibbecai the Hushathite, Ilai the Ahohite,
Chr. Maharai the Netophathite, Heled the son of Baanah the Netophathite,
Chr. Ithai the son of Ribai of Gibeah of the sons of Benjamin, Benaiah the Pirathonite,
Chr. Hurai of the brooks of Gaash, Abiel the Arbathite,
Chr. Azmaveth the Baharumite, Eliahba the Shaalbonite,
Chr. the sons of Hashem the Gizonite, Jonathan the son of Shagee the Hararite,
Chr. Ahiam the son of Sacar the Hararite, Eliphal the son of Ur,
Chr. Hepher the Mecherathite, Ahijah the Pelonite,
Chr. Hezro the Carmelite, Naarai the son of Ezbai,
Chr. Joel the brother of Nathan, Mibhar the son of Hagri,
Chr. Zelek the Ammonite, Naharai the Berothite, the armor bearer of Joab the son of Zeruiah,
Chr. Ira the Ithrite, Gareb the Ithrite,
Chr. Uriah the Hittite, Zabad the son of Ahlai,
Chr. Adina the son of Shiza the Reubenite, a chief of the Reubenites,  thirty with him,
Chr. Hanan the son of Maacah,  Joshaphat the Mithnite,
Chr. Uzzia the Ashterathite, Shama and Jeiel the sons of Hotham the Aroerite,
Chr. Jediael the son of Shimri,  Joha his brother, the Tizite,
Chr. Eliel the Mahavite,  Jeribai,  Joshaviah, the sons of Elnaam,  Ithmah the Moabite,
Chr. Eliel,  Obed,  Jaasiel the Mezobaite.
Chr. Now these are those who came to David to Ziklag while he yet kept himself close because of Saul the son of Kish. And they were among the mighty men, his helpers in war.
Chr. They were armed with bows,  could use both the right hand and the left in slinging stones and in shooting arrows from the bow. They were of Saul's brothers of Benjamin.
Chr. The chief was Ahiezer, then Joash, the sons of Shemaah the Gibeathite,  Jeziel,  Pelet, the sons of Azmaveth,  Beracah,  Jehu the Anathothite,
Chr. and Ishmaiah the Gibeonite, a mighty man among the thirty,  over the thirty,  Jeremiah,  Jahaziel,  Johanan,  Jozabad the Gederathite,
Chr. Eluzai,  Jerimoth,  Bealiah,  Shemariah,  Shephatiah the Haruphite,
Chr. Elkanah,  Isshiah,  Azarel,  Joezer,  Jashobeam, the Korahites,
Chr. and Joelah,  Zebadiah, the sons of Jeroham of Gedor.
Chr. And of the Gadites there separated themselves to David to the stronghold in the wilderness, mighty men of valor, men trained for war, who could handle shield and spear, whose faces were like the faces of lions,  they were as swift as the roes upon the mountains:
Chr. Ezer the chief, Obadiah the second, Eliab the third,
Chr. Mishmannah the fourth, Jeremiah the fifth,
Chr. Attai the sixth, Eliel the seventh,
Chr. Johanan the eighth, Elzabad the ninth,
Chr. Jeremiah the tenth, Machbannai the eleventh.
Chr. These of the sons of Gad were captains of the army. He who was least was equal to a hundred,  the greatest to a thousand.
Chr. These are those who went over the Jordan in the first month when it had overflowed all its banks. And they put to flight all those of the valleys, both toward the east,  toward the west.
Chr. And there came of the sons of Benjamin and Judah to the stronghold to David.
Chr. And David went out to meet them,  answered and said to them, If ye have come peaceably to me to help me, my heart shall be knit to you,  if ye be come to betray me to my adversaries, seeing there is no wrong in my hands, the God of our fathers look thereon,  rebuke it.
Chr. Then the Spirit came upon Amasai, who was chief of the thirty,  he said, We are thine, David,  on thy side, thou son of Jesse. Peace, peace be to thee,  peace be to thy helpers, for thy God helps thee. Then David received them,  made them captains of the band.
Chr. From Manasseh also there fell away some to David when he came with the Philistines against Saul to battle. But they did not help them, for the lords of the Philistines sent him away upon advisement, saying, He will fall away to his master Saul to the jeopardy of our heads.
Chr. As he went to Ziklag, there came to him from Manasseh, Adnah,  Jozabad,  Jediael,  Michael,  Jozabad,  Elihu,  Zillethai, captains of thousands who were of Manasseh.
Chr. And they helped David against the band of rovers, for they were all mighty men of valor,  were captains in the army.
Chr. For from day to day men came to David to help him, until there was a great host, like the host of God.
Chr. And these are the numbers of the heads of those who were armed for war, who came to David to Hebron, to turn the kingdom of Saul to him, according to the word of Jehovah.
Chr. The sons of Judah who bore shield and spear were six thousand and eight hundred, armed for war.
Chr. Of the sons of Simeon, mighty men of valor for the war, seven thousand and one hundred.
Chr. Of the sons of Levi four thousand and six hundred.
Chr. And Jehoiada was the leader of the house of Aaron. And with him were three thousand and seven hundred,
Chr. and Zadok, a young man mighty of valor,  of his father's house twenty-two captains.
Chr. And of the sons of Benjamin, the brothers of Saul, three thousand, for hitherto the greatest part of them had kept their allegiance to the house of Saul.
Chr. And of the sons of Ephraim twenty thousand and eight hundred, mighty men of valor, famous men in their fathers' houses.
Chr. And of the half-tribe of Manasseh eighteen thousand, who were mentioned by name, to come and make David king.
Chr. And of the sons of Issachar, men who had understanding of the times to know what Israel ought to do, the heads of them were two hundred. And all their brothers were at their commandment.
Chr. Of Zebulun, such as were able to go out in the army, who could set the battle in array, with all manner of instruments of war, fifty thousand,  who could order the battle array,  were not of double heart.
Chr. And of Naphtali a thousand captains,  with them thirty-seven thousand with shield and spear.
Chr. And of the Danites who could set the battle in array, twenty-eight thousand and six hundred.
Chr. And of Asher, such as were able to go out in the army, who could set the battle in array, forty thousand.
Chr. And on the other side of the Jordan, of the Reubenites,  the Gadites,  of the half-tribe of Manasseh, with all manner of instruments of war for the battle, a hundred and twenty thousand.
Chr. All these being men of war, who could order the battle array, came with a perfect heart to Hebron, to make David king over all Israel. And all the rest also of Israel were of one heart to make David king.
Chr. And they were there with David three days, eating and drinking, for their brothers had made preparation for them.
Chr. Moreover those who were near to them, even as far as Issachar and Zebulun and Naphtali, brought bread on donkeys,  on camels,  on mules,  on oxen, provisions of meal, cakes of figs,  clusters of raisins,  wine,  oil,  oxen,  sheep in abundance, for there was joy in Israel.
Chr. And David consulted with the captains of thousands and of hundreds, even with every leader.
Chr. And David said to all the assembly of Israel, If it seems good to you,  if it be of Jehovah our God, let us send abroad everywhere to our brothers who are left in all the land of Israel, with whom the priests and Levites are in their cities that have suburbs, that they may gather themselves to us.
Chr. And let us bring again the ark of our God to us, for we did not inquire from it in the days of Saul.
Chr. And all the assembly said that they would do so, for the thing was right in the eyes of all the people.
Chr. So David assembled all Israel together, from the Shihor the brook of Egypt even to the entrance of Hamath, to bring the ark of God from Kiriath-jearim.
Chr. And David went up,  all Israel, to Baalah, that is to Kiriath-jearim, which belonged to Judah, to bring up from there the ark of God, Jehovah who sits above the cherubim that is called by the Name.
Chr. And they carried the ark of God upon a new cart,  brought it out of the house of Abinadab. And Uzza and Ahio drove the cart.
Chr. And David and all Israel played before God with all their might, even with songs,  with harps,  with psalteries,  with timbrels,  with cymbals,  with trumpets.
Chr. And when they came to the threshing-floor of Chidon, Uzza put forth his hand to hold the ark, for the oxen stumbled.
Chr. And the anger of Jehovah was kindled against Uzza,  he smote him because he put forth his hand to the ark. And there he died before God.
Chr. And David was displeased, because Jehovah had broken forth upon Uzza. And he called that place Perez-uzza, to this day.
Chr. And David was afraid of God that day, saying, How shall I bring the ark of God home to me?
Chr. So David did not move the ark to him into the city of David,  carried it aside into the house of Obed-edom the Gittite.
Chr. And the ark of God remained with the family of Obed-edom in his house three months. And Jehovah blessed the house of Obed-edom,  all that he had.
Chr. And Hiram king of Tyre sent messengers to David,  cedar trees,  masons,  carpenters, to build for him a house.
Chr. And David perceived that Jehovah had established him king over Israel, for his kingdom was exalted on high for his people Israel's sake.
Chr. And David took more wives at Jerusalem,  David begot more sons and daughters.
Chr. And these are the names of the children whom he had in Jerusalem: Shammua,  Shobab, Nathan,  Solomon,
Chr. and Ibhar,  Elishua,  Elpelet,
Chr. and Nogah,  Nepheg,  Japhia,
Chr. and Elishama,  Beeliada,  Eliphelet.
Chr. And when the Philistines heard that David was anointed king over all Israel, all the Philistines went up to seek David. And David heard of it,  went out against them.
Chr. Now the Philistines had come and made a raid in the valley of Rephaim.
Chr. And David inquired of God, saying, Shall I go up against the Philistines? And will thou deliver them into my hand? And Jehovah said to him, Go up, for I will deliver them into thy hand.
Chr. So they came up to Baal-perazim,  David smote them there. And David said, God has broken my enemies by my hand like the breach of waters. Therefore they called the name of that place Baal-perazim.
Chr. And they left their gods there. And David gave commandment,  they were burned with fire.
Chr. And the Philistines yet again made a raid in the valley.
Chr. And David inquired again of God. And God said to him, Thou shall not go up after them. Turn away from them,  come upon them opposite the mulberry trees.
Chr. And it shall be, when thou hear the sound of marching in the tops of the mulberry trees, that then thou shall go out to battle. For God has gone out before thee to smite the army of the Philistines.
Chr. And David did as God commanded him,  they smote the army of the Philistines from Gibeon even to Gezer.
Chr. And the fame of David went out into all lands. And Jehovah brought the fear of him upon all nations.
Chr. And David made for him houses in the city of David. And he prepared a place for the ark of God,  pitched a tent for it.
Chr. Then David said, None ought to carry the ark of God but the Levites, for Jehovah has them chosen to carry the ark of God,  to minister to him forever.
Chr. And David assembled all Israel at Jerusalem to bring up the ark of Jehovah to its place, which he had prepared for it.
Chr. And David gathered together the sons of Aaron,  the Levites:
Chr. of the sons of Kohath, Uriel the chief,  his brothers a hundred and twenty;
Chr. of the sons of Merari, Asaiah the chief,  his brothers two hundred and twenty;
Chr. of the sons of Gershom, Joel the chief,  his brothers a hundred and thirty;
Chr. of the sons of Elizaphan, Shemaiah the chief,  his brothers two hundred;
Chr. of the sons of Hebron, Eliel the chief,  his brothers eighty;
Chr. of the sons of Uzziel, Amminadab the chief,  his brothers a hundred and twelve.
Chr. And David called for Zadok and Abiathar the priests,  for the Levites, for Uriel, Asaiah,  Joel, Shemaiah,  Eliel,  Amminadab.
Chr. And said to them, Ye are the heads of the fathers of the Levites. Sanctify yourselves, both ye and your brothers, that ye may bring up the ark of Jehovah, the God of Israel, to the place that I have prepared for it.
Chr. For because ye did not at the first, Jehovah our God made a breach upon us, because we did not seek him according to the ordinance.
Chr. So the priests and the Levites sanctified themselves to bring up the ark of Jehovah, the God of Israel.
Chr. And the sons of the Levites bore the ark of God upon their shoulders with the staves thereon, as Moses commanded according to the word of Jehovah.
Chr. And David spoke to the chief of the Levites to appoint their brothers the singers, with instruments of music, psalteries and harps and cymbals, sounding aloud and lifting up the voice with joy.
Chr. So the Levites appointed Heman the son of Joel. And of his brothers, Asaph the son of Berechiah. And of the sons of Merari their brothers, Ethan the son of Kushaiah.
Chr. And with them their brothers of the second degree, Zechariah, Ben,  Jaaziel,  Shemiramoth,  Jehiel,  Unni, Eliab,  Benaiah,  Maaseiah,  Mattithiah,  Eliphelehu,  Mikneiah,  Obed-edom,  Jeiel, the porters.
Chr. So the singers, Heman, Asaph,  Ethan, were appointed with cymbals of brass to sound aloud.
Chr. And Zechariah,  Aziel,  Shemiramoth,  Jehiel,  Unni,  Eliab,  Maaseiah,  Benaiah, with psalteries set to Alamoth.
Chr. And Mattithiah,  Eliphelehu,  Mikneiah,  Obed-edom,  Jeiel,  Azaziah, with harps set to the Sheminith, to lead.
Chr. And Chenaniah, chief of the Levites, was over the song. He instructed about the song because he was skilful.
Chr. And Berechiah and Elkanah were porters for the ark.
Chr. And Shebaniah,  Joshaphat,  Nethanel,  Amasai,  Zechariah,  Benaiah,  Eliezer, the priests, blew the trumpets before the ark of God. And Obed-edom and Jehiah were porters for the ark.
Chr. So David,  the elders of Israel,  the captains over thousands, went to bring up the ark of the covenant of Jehovah out of the house of Obed-edom with joy.
Chr. And it came to pass, when God helped the Levites who bore the ark of the covenant of Jehovah, that they sacrificed seven bullocks and seven rams.
Chr. And David was clothed with a robe of fine linen,  all the Levites who bore the ark,  the singers,  Chenaniah the master of the song with the singers. And David had upon him an ephod of linen.
Chr. Thus all Israel brought up the ark of the covenant of Jehovah with shouting,  with sound of the cornet,  with trumpets,  with cymbals, sounding aloud with psalteries and harps.
Chr. And it came to pass, as the ark of the covenant of Jehovah came to the city of David, that Michal the daughter of Saul looked out at the window,  saw king David dancing and playing. And she despised him in her heart.
Chr. And they brought in the ark of God,  set it in the midst of the tent that David had pitched for it. And they offered burnt offerings and peace offerings before God.
Chr. And when David had made an end of offering the burnt offering and the peace offerings, he blessed the people in the name of Jehovah.
Chr. And he dealt to every one of Israel, both man and woman, to every one a loaf of bread,  a portion of flesh,  a cake of raisins.
Chr. And he appointed certain of the Levites to minister before the ark of Jehovah,  to celebrate and to thank and praise Jehovah, the God of Israel:
Chr. Asaph the chief,  second to him Zechariah, Jeiel,  Shemiramoth,  Jehiel,  Mattithiah,  Eliab,  Benaiah,  Obed-edom,  Jeiel, with psalteries and with harps,  Asaph with cymbals, sounding aloud,
Chr. and Benaiah and Jahaziel the priests with trumpets continually, before the ark of the covenant of God.
Chr. Then on that day David first ordained to give thanks to Jehovah by the hand of Asaph and his brothers.
Chr. O give thanks to Jehovah. Call upon his name. Make known his doings among the peoples.
Chr. Sing to him. Sing praises to him. Talk ye of all his marvelous works.
Chr. Glory ye in his holy name. Let the heart of those who seek Jehovah rejoice.
Chr. Seek ye Jehovah and his strength. Seek his face evermore.
Chr. Remember his marvelous works that he has done, his wonders,  the judgments of his mouth,
Chr. O ye seed of Israel his servant, ye sons of Jacob, his chosen ones.
Chr. He is Jehovah our God. His judgments are in all the earth.
Chr. Remember his covenant forever, the word which he commanded to a thousand generations,
Chr. the covenant which he made with Abraham,  his oath to Isaac,
Chr. and confirmed the same to Jacob for a statute, to Israel for an everlasting covenant,
Chr. saying, To thee I will give the land of Canaan, the lot of your inheritance,
Chr. when ye were but a few men in number, yea, very few,  sojourners in it,
Chr. and they went about from nation to nation,  from one kingdom to another people.
Chr. He allowed no man to do them wrong. Yea, he reproved kings for their sakes,
Chr. saying, Touch not my anointed ones,  do my prophets no harm.
Chr. Sing to Jehovah, all the earth. Show forth his salvation from day to day.
Chr. Declare his glory among the nations, his marvelous works among all the peoples.
Chr. For great is Jehovah,  greatly to be praised. He also is to be feared above all gods.
Chr. For all the gods of the peoples are idols. But Jehovah made the heavens.
Chr. Honor and majesty are before him. Strength and gladness are in his place.
Chr. Ascribe to Jehovah, ye kindred of the peoples. Ascribe to Jehovah glory and strength.
Chr. Ascribe to Jehovah the glory due to his name. Bring an offering,  come before him. Worship Jehovah in holy array.
Chr. Tremble before him, all the earth. The world also is established that it cannot be moved.
Chr. Let the heavens be glad,  let the earth rejoice. And let them say among the nations, Jehovah reigns.
Chr. Let the sea roar,  the fullness of it. Let the field exult,  all that is therein.
Chr. Then shall the trees of the wood sing for joy before Jehovah, for he comes to judge the earth.
Chr. O give thanks to Jehovah, for he is good, for his loving kindness is forever.
Chr. And say ye, Save us, O God of our salvation. And gather us together and deliver us from the nations, to give thanks to thy holy name,  to triumph in thy praise.
Chr. Blessed be Jehovah, the God of Israel, from everlasting even to everlasting. And all the people said, Truly,  praised Jehovah.
Chr. So he left there, before the ark of the covenant of Jehovah, Asaph and his brothers, to minister before the ark continually, as every day's work required,
Chr. and Obed-edom with their sixty-eight brothers. And Obed-edom the son of Jeduthun and Hosah were to be porters,
Chr. and Zadok the priest,  his brothers the priests, before the tabernacle of Jehovah in the high place that was at Gibeon,
Chr. to offer burnt offerings to Jehovah upon the altar of burnt offering continually morning and evening, even according to all that is written in the law of Jehovah, which he commanded to Israel.
Chr. And with them Heman and Jeduthun,  the rest that were chosen, who were mentioned by name, to give thanks to Jehovah because his loving kindness is forever.
Chr. And with them Heman and Jeduthun with trumpets and cymbals for those who should sound aloud,  with instruments for the songs of God,  the sons of Jeduthun to be at the gate.
Chr. And all the people departed every man to his house. And David returned to bless his house.
Chr. And it came to pass, when David dwelt in his house, that David said to Nathan the prophet, Lo, I dwell in a house of cedar,  the ark of the covenant of Jehovah dwells under curtains.
Chr. And Nathan said to David, Do all that is in thy heart, for God is with thee.
Chr. And it came to pass the same night, that the word of God came to Nathan, saying,
Chr. Go and tell David my servant, Thus says Jehovah, Thou shall not build for me a house to dwell in.
Chr. For I have not dwelt in a house since the day that I brought up Israel, to this day,  have gone from tent to tent,  from one tabernacle to another.
Chr. In all places wherein I have walked with all Israel, did I speak a word with any of the judges of Israel, whom I commanded to be shepherd of my people, saying, Why have ye not built for me a house of cedar?
Chr. Now therefore thus thou shall say to my servant David, Thus says Jehovah of hosts, I took thee from the sheepfold, from following the sheep, that thou should be prince over my people Israel.
Chr. And I have been with thee wherever thou have gone,  have cut off all thine enemies from before thee. And I will make thee a name like the name of the great ones who are on the earth.
Chr. And I will appoint a place for my people Israel,  will plant them, that they may dwell in their own place,  be moved no more. Neither shall the sons of wickedness waste them any more, as at the first,
Chr. and as from the day that I commanded judges to be over my people Israel. And I will subdue all thine enemies. Moreover I tell thee that Jehovah will build for thee a house.
Chr. And it shall come to pass, when thy days are fulfilled that thou must go to be with thy fathers, that I will set up thy seed after thee, who shall be of thy sons. And I will establish his kingdom.
Chr. He shall build for me a house,  I will establish his throne forever.
Chr. I will be his father,  he shall be my son. And I will not take my loving kindness away from him as I took it from him who was before thee.
Chr. But I will settle him in my house and in my kingdom forever,  his throne shall be established forever.
Chr. According to all these words,  according to all this vision, so Nathan spoke to David.
Chr. Then David the king went in,  sat before Jehovah. And he said, Who am I, O Jehovah God,  what is my house, that thou have brought me thus far?
Chr. And this was a small thing in thine eyes, O God. But thou have spoken of thy servant's house for a great while to come,  have regarded me according to the estate of a man of high degree, O Jehovah God.
Chr. What can David say yet more to thee concerning the honor which is done to thy servant? For thou know thy servant.
Chr. O Jehovah, for thy servant's sake,  according to thine own heart, thou have wrought all this greatness, to make known all these great things.
Chr. O Jehovah, there is none like thee, neither is there any God besides thee, according to all that we have heard with our ears.
Chr. And what one nation on the earth is like thy people Israel, whom God went to redeem to himself for a people, to make thee a name by great and awesome things, in driving out nations from before thy people whom thou redeemed out of Egypt?
Chr. For thy people Israel thou made thine own people forever. And thou, Jehovah, became their God.
Chr. And now, O Jehovah, let the word that thou have spoken concerning thy servant,  concerning his house, be established forever,  do as thou have spoken.
Chr. And let thy name be established and magnified forever, saying, Jehovah of hosts is the God of Israel, even a God to Israel,  the house of David thy servant is established before thee.
Chr. For thou, O my God, have revealed to thy servant that thou will build him a house. Therefore thy servant has found in his heart to pray before thee.
Chr. And now, O Jehovah, thou are God,  have promised this good thing to thy servant,
Chr. and now it has pleased thee to bless the house of thy servant, that it may continue for ever before thee; for thou, O Jehovah, have blessed,  it is blessed forever.
Chr. And after this it came to pass, that David smote the Philistines,  subdued them,  took Gath and its towns out of the hand of the Philistines.
Chr. And he smote Moab,  the Moabites became servants to David,  brought tribute.
Chr. And David smote Hadarezer king of Zobah to Hamath, as he went to establish his dominion by the river Euphrates.
Chr. And David took from him a thousand chariots,  seven thousand horsemen,  twenty thousand footmen. And David hocked all the chariot horses,  reserved from them for a hundred chariots.
Chr. And when the Syrians of Damascus came to aid Hadarezer king of Zobah, David smote of the Syrians twenty-two thousand men.
Chr. Then David put garrisons in Syria of Damascus. And the Syrians became servants to David,  brought tribute. And Jehovah gave victory to David wherever he went.
Chr. And David took the shields of gold that were on the servants of Hadarezer,  brought them to Jerusalem.
Chr. And from Tibhath and from Cun, cities of Hadarezer, David took very much brass, with which Solomon made the brazen sea,  the pillars,  the vessels of brass.
Chr. And when Tou king of Hamath heard that David had smitten all the army of Hadarezer king of Zobah,
Chr. he sent Hadoram his son to king David, to salute him,  to bless him, because he had fought against Hadarezer and smitten him (for Hadarezer had wars with Tou),  he had with him all manner of vessels of gold and silver and brass.
Chr. These also king David dedicated to Jehovah, with the silver and the gold that he carried away from all the nations: from Edom,  from Moab,  from the sons of Ammon,  from the Philistines,  from Amalek.
Chr. Moreover Abishai the son of Zeruiah smote eighteen thousand of the Edomites in the Valley of Salt.
Chr. And he put garrisons in Edom,  all the Edomites became servants to David. And Jehovah gave victory to David wherever he went.
Chr. And David reigned over all Israel,  he executed justice and righteousness to all his people.
Chr. And Joab the son of Zeruiah was over the army,  Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud was recorder,
Chr. and Zadok the son of Ahitub,  Abimelech the son of Abiathar, were priests,  Shavsha was scribe,
Chr. and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over the Cherethites and the Pelethites,  the sons of David were chief about the king.
Chr. And it came to pass after this, that Nahash the king of the sons of Ammon died,  his son reigned in his stead.
Chr. And David said, I will show kindness to Hanun the son of Nahash, because his father showed kindness to me. So David sent messengers to comfort him concerning his father. And David's servants came into the land of the sons of Ammon to Hanun, to comfort him.
Chr. But the rulers of the sons of Ammon said to Hanun, Do thou think that David honors thy father, in that he has sent comforters to thee? Have not his servants come to thee to search,  to overthrow,  to spy out the land?
Chr. So Hanun took David's servants,  shaved them,  cut off their garments in the middle, even to their buttocks,  sent them away.
Chr. And they came and informed David about the men. And he sent to meet them, for the men were greatly ashamed. And the king said, Remain at Jericho until your beards be grown,  then return.
Chr. And when the sons of Ammon saw that they had made themselves odious to David, Hanun and the sons of Ammon sent a thousand talents of silver to hire for them chariots and horsemen out of Mesopotamia,  out of Arammaacah,  out of Zobah.
Chr. So they hired for them thirty-two thousand chariots,  the king of Maacah and his people, who came and encamped before Medeba. And the sons of Ammon gathered themselves together from their cities,  came to battle.
Chr. And when David heard of it, he sent Joab,  all the army of the mighty men.
Chr. And the sons of Ammon came out,  put the battle in array at the gate of the city. And the kings that came were by themselves in the field.
Chr. Now when Joab saw that the battle was set against him in front and behind, he chose from all the choice men of Israel,  put them in array against the Syrians.
Chr. And the rest of the company he committed into the hand of Abishai his brother,  they put themselves in array against the sons of Ammon.
Chr. And he said, If the Syrians be too strong for me, then thou shall help me,  if the sons of Ammon be too strong for thee, then I will help thee.
Chr. Be of good courage,  let us act the man for our people,  for the cities of our God. And Jehovah do that which seems good to him.
Chr. So Joab and the company that were with him drew near before the Syrians to the battle,  they fled before him.
Chr. And when the sons of Ammon saw that the Syrians had fled, they likewise fled before Abishai his brother,  entered into the city. Then Joab came to Jerusalem.
Chr. And when the Syrians saw that they were put to the worse before Israel, they sent messengers,  drew forth the Syrians that were beyond the River, with Shophach the captain of the army of Hadarezer at their head.
Chr. And it was told David. And he gathered all Israel together,  passed over the Jordan,  came upon them,  set the battle in array against them. So when David had put the battle in array against the Syrians, they fought with him.
Chr. And the Syrians fled before Israel. And David killed of the Syrians the men of seven thousand chariots,  forty thousand footmen,  killed Shophach the captain of the army.
Chr. And when the servants of Hadarezer saw that they were put to the worse before Israel, they made peace with David,  served him, neither would the Syrians help the sons of Ammon any more.
Chr. And it came to pass, at the time of the return of the year, at the time when kings go out to battle, that Joab led forth the army,  wasted the country of the sons of Ammon,  came and besieged Rabbah,  David remained at Jerusalem. And Joab smote Rabbah,  overthrew it.
Chr. And David took the crown of their king from off his head,  found it to weigh a talent of gold,  there were precious stones in it. And it was set upon David's head,  he brought forth the spoil of the city, exceedingly much.
Chr. And he brought forth the people that were therein,  cut with saws,  with harrows of iron,  with axes. And thus David did to all the cities of the sons of Ammon. And David and all the people returned to Jerusalem.
Chr. And it came to pass after this, that there arose war at Gezer with the Philistines. Then Sibbecai the Hushathite killed Sippai of the sons of the giant,  they were subdued.
Chr. And there was again war with the Philistines. And Elhanan the son of Jair killed Lahmi the brother of Goliath the Gittite, the staff of whose spear was like a weaver's beam.
Chr. And there was again war at Gath, where was a man of great stature whose fingers and toes were twenty-four, six on each hand,  six on each foot. And he also was born to the giant.
Chr. And when he defied Israel, Jonathan the son of Shimea David's brother killed him.
Chr. These were born to the giant in Gath,  they fell by the hand of David,  by the hand of his servants.
Chr. And Satan stood up against Israel,  moved David to number Israel.
Chr. And David said to Joab and to the princes of the people, Go, number Israel from Beersheba even to Dan,  bring me word that I may know the sum of them.
Chr. And Joab said, Jehovah make his people a hundred times as many as they are. But, my lord the king, are they not all my lord's servants? Why does my lord require this thing? Why will he be a cause of guilt to Israel?
Chr. Nevertheless the king's word prevailed against Joab. Therefore Joab departed,  went throughout all Israel,  came to Jerusalem.
Chr. And Joab gave up the sum of the numbering of the people to David. And all those of Israel were a million and a hundred thousand men who drew a sword. And Judah was four hundred seventy thousand men who drew a sword.
Chr. But he did not count Levi and Benjamin among them, for the king's word was abominable to Joab.
Chr. And God was displeased with this thing, therefore he smote Israel.
Chr. And David said to God, I have sinned greatly, in that I have done this thing. But now, put away, I beseech thee, the iniquity of thy servant, for I have done very foolishly.
Chr. And Jehovah spoke to Gad, David's seer, saying,
Chr. Go and speak to David, saying, Thus says Jehovah, I offer thee three things. Choose thee one of them, that I may do it to thee.
Chr. So Gad came to David,  said to him, Thus says Jehovah, Take which thou will:
Chr. either three years of famine, or three months to be consumed before thy foes while the sword of thine enemies overtakes thee, or else three days the sword of Jehovah, even pestilence in the land,  the agent of Jehovah destroying throughout all the borders of Israel. Now therefore consider what answer I shall return to him who sent me.
Chr. And David said to Gad, I am in a great strait. Let me fall, I pray, into the hand of Jehovah, for his mercies are very great,  let me not fall into the hand of man.
Chr. So Jehovah sent a pestilence upon Israel,  there fell of Israel seventy thousand men.
Chr. And God sent an agent to Jerusalem to destroy it. And as he was about to destroy, Jehovah beheld,  he relented of the evil,  said to the destroying agent, It is enough. Now halt thy hand. And the agent of Jehovah was standing by the threshing-floor of Ornan the Jebusite.
Chr. And David lifted up his eyes,  saw the agent of Jehovah standing between earth and heaven, having a drawn sword in his hand stretched out over Jerusalem. Then David and the elders, clothed in sackcloth, fell upon their faces.
Chr. And David said to God, Is it not I who commanded the people to be numbered? Even I it is who have sinned and done very badly. But these sheep, what have they done? Let thy hand, I pray thee, O Jehovah my God, be against me,  against my father's house,  not against thy people, that they should be plagued.
Chr. Then the agent of Jehovah commanded Gad to say to David that David should go up,  rear an altar to Jehovah in the threshing-floor of Ornan the Jebusite.
Chr. And David went up at the saying of Gad, which he spoke in the name of Jehovah.
Chr. And Ornan turned back,  saw the agent,  his four sons who were with him hid themselves. Now Ornan was threshing wheat.
Chr. And as David came to Ornan, Ornan looked and saw David,  went out of the threshing-floor,  bowed himself to David with his face to the ground.
Chr. Then David said to Ornan, Give me the place of this threshing-floor, that I may build thereon an altar to Jehovah. For the full price thou shall give it me, that the plague may be stopped from the people.
Chr. And Ornan said to David, Take it to thee,  let my lord the king do that which is good in his eyes. Lo, I give thee the oxen for burnt offerings,  the threshing instruments for wood,  the wheat for the meal offering. I give it all.
Chr. And king David said to Ornan, No,  I will truly buy it for the full price. For I will not take that which is thine for Jehovah, nor offer a burnt offering without cost.
Chr. So David gave to Ornan for the place six hundred shekels of gold by weight.
Chr. And David built there an altar to Jehovah,  offered burnt offerings and peace offerings,  called upon Jehovah. And he answered him from heaven by fire upon the altar of burnt offering.
Chr. And Jehovah commanded the agent,  he put up his sword again into the sheath of it.
Chr. At that time, when David saw that Jehovah had answered him in the threshing-floor of Ornan the Jebusite, then he sacrificed there.
Chr. For the tabernacle of Jehovah, which Moses made in the wilderness,  the altar of burnt offering, were at that time in the high place at Gibeon.
Chr. But David could not go before it to inquire of God, for he was afraid because of the sword of the agent of Jehovah.
Chr. Then David said, This is the house of Jehovah God,  this is the altar of burnt offering for Israel.
Chr. And David commanded to gather together the sojourners that were in the land of Israel. And he set masons to hew wrought stones to build the house of God.
Chr. And David prepared iron in abundance for the nails for the doors of the gates,  for the couplings,  brass in abundance without weight,
Chr. and cedar trees without number. For the Sidonians and those of Tyre brought cedar trees in abundance to David.
Chr. And David said, Solomon my son is young and tender,  the house that is to be built for Jehovah must be exceedingly magnificent, of fame and of glory throughout all countries. I will therefore make preparation for it. So David prepared abundantly before his death.
Chr. Then he called for Solomon his son,  charged him to build a house for Jehovah, the God of Israel.
Chr. And David said to Solomon his son, As for me, it was in my heart to build a house to the name of Jehovah my God.
Chr. But the word of Jehovah came to me, saying, Thou have shed blood abundantly,  have made great wars. Thou shall not build a house to my name because thou have shed much blood upon the earth in my sight.
Chr. Behold, a son shall be born to thee, who shall be a man of rest. And I will give him rest from all his enemies round about, for his name shall be Solomon. And I will give peace and quietness to Israel in his days.
Chr. He shall build a house for my name. And he shall be my son,  I will be his father,  I will establish the throne of his kingdom over Israel forever.
Chr. Now, my son, Jehovah be with thee,  prosper thou,  build the house of Jehovah thy God as he has spoken concerning thee.
Chr. Only Jehovah give thee discretion and understanding,  give thee charge concerning Israel, so that thou may keep the law of Jehovah thy God.
Chr. Then thou shall prosper, if thou observe to do the statutes and the ordinances which Jehovah charged Moses with concerning Israel. Be strong,  of good courage. Fear not, neither be dismayed.
Chr. Now, behold, in my affliction I have prepared for the house of Jehovah a hundred thousand talents of gold,  a million talents of silver,  of brass and iron without weight, for it is in abundance. Also I have prepared timber and stone,  thou may add thereto.
Chr. Moreover there are workmen with thee in abundance, hewers and workers of stone and timber,  all men who are skilful in every manner of work.
Chr. Of the gold, the silver,  the brass,  the iron, there is no number. Arise and be doing,  Jehovah be with thee.
Chr. David also commanded all the rulers of Israel to help Solomon his son, saying,
Chr. Is not Jehovah your God with you? And has he not given you rest on every side? For he has delivered the inhabitants of the land into my hand,  the land is subdued before Jehovah,  before his people.
Chr. Now set your heart and your soul to seek after Jehovah your God. Arise therefore,  build ye the sanctuary of Jehovah God, to bring the ark of the covenant of Jehovah,  the holy vessels of God, into the house that is to be built to the name of Jehovah.
Chr. Now David was old and full of days,  he made Solomon his son king over Israel.
Chr. And he gathered together all the rulers of Israel, with the priests and the Levites.
Chr. And the Levites were numbered from thirty years old and upward. And their number by their polls, man by man, was thirty-eight thousand.
Chr. Of these, twenty-four thousand were to oversee the work of the house of Jehovah. And six thousand were officers and judges,
Chr. and four thousand were porters,  four thousand praised Jehovah with the instruments which I made, David said, to praise therewith.
Chr. And David divided them into divisions according to the sons of Levi: Gershon, Kohath,  Merari.
Chr. Of the Gershonites: Ladan and Shimei.
Chr. The sons of Ladan: Jehiel the chief,  Zetham,  Joel, three.
Chr. The sons of Shimei: Shelomoth,  Haziel,  Haran, three. These were the heads of the fathers of Ladan.
Chr. And the sons of Shimei: Jahath, Zina,  Jeush,  Beriah. These four were the sons of Shimei.
Chr. And Jahath was the chief,  Zizah the second. But Jeush and Beriah had not many sons. Therefore they became a fathers' house in one reckoning.
Chr. The sons of Kohath: Amram, Izhar, Hebron,  Uzziel, four.
Chr. The sons of Amram: Aaron and Moses. And Aaron was separated that he should sanctify the most holy things, he and his sons, forever, to burn incense before Jehovah, to minister to him,  to bless in his name, forever.
Chr. But as for Moses the man of God, his sons were named among the tribe of Levi.
Chr. The sons of Moses: Gershom and Eliezer.
Chr. The sons of Gershom: Shebuel the chief.
Chr. And the sons of Eliezer were: Rehabiah the chief. And Eliezer had no other sons,  the sons of Rehabiah were very many.
Chr. The sons of Izhar: Shelomith the chief.
Chr. The sons of Hebron: Jeriah the chief, Amariah the second, Jahaziel the third,  Jekameam the fourth.
Chr. The sons of Uzziel: Micah the chief,  Isshiah the second.
Chr. The sons of Merari: Mahli and Mushi. The sons of Mahli: Eleazar and Kish.
Chr. And Eleazar died,  had no sons,  daughters only. And their brothers the sons of Kish took them to wife.
Chr. The sons of Mushi: Mahli,  Eder,  Jeremoth, three.
Chr. These were the sons of Levi after their fathers' houses, even the heads of the fathers of those of them that were counted, in the number of names by their polls, who did the work for the service of the house of Jehovah, from twenty years old and upward.
Chr. For David said, Jehovah, the God of Israel, has given rest to his people,  he dwells in Jerusalem forever.
Chr. And also the Levites shall no more have need to carry the tabernacle and all the vessels of it for the service of it.
Chr. For by the last words of David the sons of Levi were numbered, from twenty years old and upward.
Chr. For their office was to wait on the sons of Aaron for the service of the house of Jehovah, in the courts,  in the chambers,  in the purifying of all holy things, even the work of the service of the house of God, also
Chr. for the showbread,  for the fine flour for a meal offering, whether of unleavened wafers, or of that which is baked in the pan, or of that which is soaked,  for all manner of measure and size.
Chr. And to stand every morning to thank and praise Jehovah,  likewise at evening.
Chr. And to offer all burnt offerings to Jehovah, on the sabbaths, on the new moons,  on the set feasts, in number according to the ordinance concerning them, continually before Jehovah.
Chr. And that they should keep the charge of the tent of meeting,  the charge of the holy place,  the charge of the sons of Aaron their brothers, for the service of the house of Jehovah.
Chr. And the divisions of the sons of Aaron were these. The sons of Aaron: Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar.
Chr. But Nadab and Abihu died before their father,  had no sons. Therefore Eleazar and Ithamar executed the priest's office.
Chr. And David with Zadok of the sons of Eleazar,  Ahimelech of the sons of Ithamar, divided them according to their ordering in their service.
Chr. And there were more chief men found of the sons of Eleazar than of the sons of Ithamar. And thus were they divided: of the sons of Eleazar there were sixteen heads of fathers' houses,  of the sons of Ithamar, according to their fathers' houses, eight.
Chr. Thus they were divided by lot, one sort with another. For there were rulers of the sanctuary,  rulers for God, both of the sons of Eleazar,  of the sons of Ithamar.
Chr. And Shemaiah the son of Nethanel the scribe, who was of the Levites, wrote them in the presence of the king,  the princes,  Zadok the priest,  Ahimelech the son of Abiathar,  the heads of the fathers of the priests and of the Levites, one fathers' house being taken for Eleazar,  one taken for Ithamar.
Chr. Now the first lot came forth to Jehoiarib, the second to Jedaiah,
Chr. the third to Harim, the fourth to Seorim,
Chr. the fifth to Malchijah, the sixth to Mijamin,
Chr. the seventh to Hakkoz, the eighth to Abijah,
Chr. the ninth to Jeshua, the tenth to Shecaniah,
Chr. the eleventh to Eliashib, the twelfth to Jakim,
Chr. the thirteenth to Huppah, the fourteenth to Jeshebeab,
Chr. the fifteenth to Bilgah, the sixteenth to Immer,
Chr. the seventeenth to Hezir, the eighteenth to Happizzez,
Chr. the nineteenth to Pethahiah, the twentieth to Jehezkel,
Chr. the twenty-first to Jachin, the twenty-second to Gamul,
Chr. the twenty-third to Delaiah, the twenty-fourth to Maaziah.
Chr. This was the ordering of them in their service, to come into the house of Jehovah according to the ordinance given to them by Aaron their father, as Jehovah, the God of Israel, had commanded him.
Chr. And of the rest of the sons of Levi: Of the sons of Amram, Shubael. Of the sons of Shubael, Jehdeiah.
Chr. Of Rehabiah: of the sons of Rehabiah, Isshiah the chief.
Chr. Of the Izharites, Shelomoth. Of the sons of Shelomoth, Jahath.
Chr. And the sons of Hebron: Jeriah the chief, Amariah the second, Jahaziel the third, Jekameam the fourth.
Chr. The sons of Uzziel, Micah. Of the sons of Micah, Shamir.
Chr. The brother of Micah, Isshiah. Of the sons of Isshiah, Zechariah.
Chr. The sons of Merari: Mahli and Mushi. The sons of Jaaziah: Beno.
Chr. The sons of Merari: Of Jaaziah, Beno,  Shoham,  Zaccur,  Ibri.
Chr. Of Mahli: Eleazar, who had no sons.
Chr. Of Kish, the sons of Kish: Jerahmeel.
Chr. And the sons of Mushi: Mahli,  Eder,  Jerimoth. These were the sons of the Levites after their fathers' houses.
Chr. These likewise cast lots even as their brothers the sons of Aaron in the presence of David the king,  Zadok,  Ahimelech,  the heads of the fathers of the priests and of the Levites, the fathers of the chief even as those of his younger brother.
Chr. Moreover David and the captains of the army set apart for the service certain of the sons of Asaph,  of Heman,  of Jeduthun, who should prophesy with harps, with psalteries,  with cymbals. And the number of those who did the work according to their service was:
Chr. of the sons of Asaph: Zaccur,  Joseph,  Nethaniah,  Asharelah, the sons of Asaph, under the hand of Asaph, who prophesied after the order of the king.
Chr. Of Jeduthun, the sons of Jeduthun: Gedaliah,  Zeri,  Jeshaiah, Hashabiah,  Mattithiah, six, under the hands of their father Jeduthun with the harp, who prophesied in giving thanks and praising Jehovah.
Chr. Of Heman, the sons of Heman: Bukkiah, Mattaniah, Uzziel, Shebuel,  Jerimoth, Hananiah, Hanani, Eliathah, Giddalti,  Romamtiezer, Joshbekashah, Mallothi, Hothir, Mahazioth.
Chr. All these were the sons of Heman the king's seer in the words of God, to lift up the horn. And God gave to Heman fourteen sons and three daughters.
Chr. All these were under the hands of their father for song in the house of Jehovah, with cymbals, psalteries,  harps, for the service of the house of God; Asaph, Jeduthun,  Heman being under the order of the king.
Chr. And the number of them, with their brothers who were instructed in singing to Jehovah, even all who were skilful, was two hundred eighty-eight.
Chr. And they cast lots for their offices, all alike, as well the small as the great, the teacher as the scholar.
Chr. Now the first lot came forth for Asaph to Joseph, the second to Gedaliah (he and his brothers and sons were twelve),
Chr. the third to Zaccur, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
Chr. the fourth to Izri, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
Chr. the fifth to Nethaniah, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
Chr. the sixth to Bukkiah, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
Chr. the seventh to Jesharelah, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
Chr. the eighth to Jeshaiah, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
Chr. the ninth to Mattaniah, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
Chr. the tenth to Shimei, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
Chr. the eleventh to Azarel, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
Chr. the twelfth to Hashabiah, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
Chr. for the thirteenth, Shubael, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
Chr. for the fourteenth, Mattithiah, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
Chr. for the fifteenth to Jeremoth, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
Chr. for the sixteenth to Hananiah, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
Chr. for the seventeenth to Joshbekashah, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
Chr. for the eighteenth to Hanani, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
Chr. for the nineteenth to Mallothi, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
Chr. for the twentieth to Eliathah, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
Chr. for the twenty-first to Hothir, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
Chr. for the twenty-second to Giddalti, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
Chr. for the twenty-third to Mahazioth, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
Chr. for the twenty-fourth to Romamtiezer, his sons and his brothers, twelve.
Chr. For the divisions of the porters: of the Korahites, Meshelemiah the son of Kore, of the sons of Asaph.
Chr. And Meshelemiah had sons: Zechariah the firstborn, Jediael the second, Zebadiah the third, Jathniel the fourth,
Chr. Elam the fifth, Jehohanan the sixth, Eliehoenai the seventh.
Chr. And Obed-edom had sons: Shemaiah the firstborn, Jehozabad the second, Joah the third,  Sacar the fourth,  Nethanel the fifth,
Chr. Ammiel the sixth, Issachar the seventh, Peullethai the eighth, for God blessed him.
Chr. Also sons were born to Shemaiah his son, who ruled over the house of their father, for they were mighty men of valor.
Chr. The sons of Shemaiah: Othni,  Rephael,  Obed, Elzabad, whose brothers were valiant men, Elihu,  Semachiah.
Chr. All these were of the sons of Obed-edom, they and their sons and their brothers, able men in strength for the service, sixty-two of Obed-edom.
Chr. And Meshelemiah had sons and brothers, valiant men, eighteen.
Chr. Also Hosah, of the sons of Merari, had sons: Shimri the chief (for though he was not the firstborn, yet his father made him chief),
Chr. Hilkiah the second, Tebaliah the third, Zechariah the fourth. All the sons and brothers of Hosah were thirteen.
Chr. Of these were the divisions of the porters, even of the chief men, having offices like their brothers to minister in the house of Jehovah.
Chr. And they cast lots, the small as well as the great, according to their fathers' houses for every gate.
Chr. And the lot eastward fell to Shelemiah. Then for Zechariah his son, a discreet counselor, they cast lots,  his lot came out northward.
Chr. To Obed-edom southward,  to his sons the store-house.
Chr. To Shuppim and Hosah westward, by the gate of Shallecheth, at the causeway that goes up, watch against watch.
Chr. Eastward were six Levites, four a day northward, four a day southward,  for the store-house two by two.
Chr. For Parbar westward, four at the highway,  two at Parbar.
Chr. These were the divisions of the porters, of the sons of the Korahites,  of the sons of Merari.
Chr. And of the Levites, Ahijah was over the treasures of the house of God,  over the treasures of the dedicated things.
Chr. The sons of Ladan, the sons of the Gershonites belonging to Ladan, the heads of the fathers belonging to Ladan the Gershonite: Jehieli.
Chr. The sons of Jehieli: Zetham,  Joel his brother, over the treasures of the house of Jehovah.
Chr. Of the Amramites, of the Izharites, of the Hebronites, of the Uzzielites:
Chr. Shebuel the son of Gershom, the son of Moses, was ruler over the treasures.
Chr. And his brothers: of Eliezer came Rehabiah his son,  Jeshaiah his son,  Joram his son,  Zichri his son,  Shelomoth his son.
Chr. This Shelomoth and his brothers were over all the treasures of the dedicated things, which David the king,  the heads of the fathers, the captains over thousands and hundreds,  the captains of the army, had dedicated.
Chr. They dedicated to repair the house of Jehovah out of the spoil won in battles.
Chr. And all that Samuel the seer,  Saul the son of Kish,  Abner the son of Ner,  Joab the son of Zeruiah, had dedicated, whoever had dedicated anything, it was under the hand of Shelomoth,  of his brothers.
Chr. Of the Izharites, Chenaniah and his sons were for the outer business over Israel, for officers and judges.
Chr. Of the Hebronites, Hashabiah and his brothers, men of valor, a thousand and seven hundred, had the oversight of Israel beyond the Jordan westward, for all the business of Jehovah,  for the service of the king.
Chr. Of the Hebronites was Jerijah the chief, even of the Hebronites, according to their generations by fathers. In the fortieth year of the reign of David they were sought for,  there were found among them mighty men of valor at Jazer of Gilead.
Chr. And his brothers, men of valor, were two thousand and seven hundred, heads of fathers, whom king David made overseers over the Reubenites,  the Gadites,  the half-tribe of the Manassites, for every matter pertaining to God,  for the affairs of the king.
Chr. Now the sons of Israel after their number, namely, the heads of fathers and the captains of thousands and of hundreds,  their officers who served the king, in any matter of the divisions which came in and went out month by month throughout all the months of the year-of every division were twenty-four thousand.
Chr. Jashobeam the son of Zabdiel was over the first division for the first month,  in his division were twenty-four thousand.
Chr. He was of the sons of Perez, the chief of all the captains of the army for the first month.
Chr. And over the division of the second month was Dodai the Ahohite,  his division. And Mikloth was the ruler. And in his division were twenty-four thousand.
Chr. The third captain of the army for the third month was Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada the priest, being chief. And in his division were twenty-four thousand.
Chr. This is that Benaiah who was the mighty man of the thirty,  over the thirty. And of his division was Ammizabad his son.
Chr. The fourth captain for the fourth month was Asahel the brother of Joab,  Zebadiah his son after him. And in his division were twenty-four thousand.
Chr. The fifth captain for this fifth month was Shamhuth the Izrahite. And in his division were twenty-four thousand.
Chr. The sixth captain for the sixth month was Ira the son of Ikkesh the Tekoite. And in his division were twenty-four thousand.
Chr. The seventh captain for the seventh month was Helez the Pelonite, of the sons of Ephraim. And in his division were twenty-four thousand.
Chr. The eighth captain for the eighth month was Sibbecai the Hushathite, of the Zerahites. And in his division were twenty-four thousand.
Chr. The ninth captain for the ninth month was Abiezer the Anathothite, of the Benjamites. And in his division were twenty-four thousand.
Chr. The tenth captain for the tenth month was Maharai the Netophathite, of the Zerahites. And in his division were twenty-four thousand.
Chr. The eleventh captain for the eleventh month was Benaiah the Pirathonite, of the sons of Ephraim. And in his division were twenty-four thousand.
Chr. The twelfth captain for the twelfth month was Heldai the Netophathite, of Othniel. And in his division were twenty-four thousand.
Chr. Furthermore over the tribes of Israel: of the Reubenites was Eliezer the son of Zichri the ruler; of the Simeonites, Shephatiah the son of Maacah;
Chr. of Levi, Hashabiah the son of Kemuel; of Aaron, Zadok;
Chr. of Judah, Elihu, one of the brothers of David; of Issachar, Omri the son of Michael;
Chr. of Zebulun, Ishmaiah the son of Obadiah; of Naphtali, Jeremoth the son of Azriel;
Chr. of the sons of Ephraim, Hoshea the son of Azaziah; of the half-tribe of Manasseh, Joel the son of Pedaiah;
Chr. of the half-tribe of Manasseh in Gilead, Iddo the son of Zechariah; of Benjamin, Jaasiel the son of Abner;
Chr. of Dan, Azarel the son of Jeroham. These were the captains of the tribes of Israel.
Chr. But David did not take the number of them from twenty years old and under, because Jehovah had said he would increase Israel like the stars of heaven.
Chr. Joab the son of Zeruiah began to number,  did not finish. And wrath came for this upon Israel. Neither was the number put into the account in the chronicles of king David.
Chr. And over the king's treasures was Azmaveth the son of Adiel. And over the treasures in the fields, in the cities,  in the villages,  in the castles, was Jonathan the son of Uzziah.
Chr. And over those who did the work of the field for tillage of the ground was Ezri the son of Chelub.
Chr. And over the vineyards was Shimei the Ramathite. And over the increase of the vineyards for the wine-cellars was Zabdi the Shiphmite.
Chr. And over the olive trees and the sycamore trees that were in the lowland was Baal-hanan the Gederite. And over the cellars of oil was Joash.
Chr. And over the herds that fed in Sharon was Shitrai the Sharonite. And over the herds that were in the valleys was Shaphat the son of Adlai.
Chr. And over the camels was Obil the Ishmaelite. And over the donkeys was Jehdeiah the Meronothite. And over the flocks was Jaziz the Hagrite.
Chr. All these were the rulers of the substance which was king David's.
Chr. Also Jonathan, David's uncle, was a counselor, a man of understanding,  a scribe. And Jehiel the son of Hachmoni was with the king's sons.
Chr. And Ahithophel was the king's counselor. And Hushai the Archite was the king's friend.
Chr. And after Ahithophel was Jehoiada the son of Benaiah,  Abiathar. And the captain of the king's army was Joab.
Chr. And David assembled all the rulers of Israel, the rulers of the tribes,  the captains of the companies that served the king by division,  the captains of thousands,  the captains of hundreds,  the rulers over all the substance and possessions of the king and of his sons, with the officers,  the mighty men, even all the mighty men of valor, to Jerusalem.
Chr. Then David the king stood up upon his feet,  said, Hear me, my brothers,  my people. As for me, it was in my heart to build a house of rest for the ark of the covenant of Jehovah,  for the footstool of our God. And I had made ready for the building.
Chr. But God said to me, Thou shall not build a house for my name, because thou are a man of war,  have shed blood.
Chr. However Jehovah, the God of Israel, chose me out of all the house of my father to be king over Israel forever. For he has chosen Judah to be ruler,  in the house of Judah, the house of my father,  among the sons of my father he took pleasure in me to make me king over all Israel.
Chr. And of all my sons (for Jehovah has given me many sons), he has chosen Solomon my son to sit upon the throne of the kingdom of Jehovah over Israel.
Chr. And he said to me, Solomon thy son, he shall build my house and my courts, for I have chosen him to be my son,  I will be his father.
Chr. And I will establish his kingdom forever, if he is constant to do my commandments and my ordinances, as at this day.
Chr. Now therefore, in the sight of all Israel, the assembly of Jehovah,  in the audience of our God, observe and seek out all the commandments of Jehovah your God, that ye may possess this good land,  leave it for an inheritance to your sons after you forever.
Chr. And thou, Solomon my son, know thou the God of thy father,  serve him with a perfect heart and with a willing mind, for Jehovah searches all hearts,  understands all the imaginations of the thoughts. If thou seek him, he will be found by thee,  if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off forever.
Chr. Take heed now, for Jehovah has chosen thee to build a house for the sanctuary. Be strong,  do it.
Chr. Then David gave to Solomon his son the pattern of the porch of the temple,  of the houses of it,  of the treasuries of it,  of the upper rooms of it,  of the inner chambers of it,  of the place of the mercy-seat,
Chr. and the pattern of all that he had by the Spirit, for the courts of the house of Jehovah,  for all the chambers round about, for the treasuries of the house of God,  for the treasuries of the dedicated things,
Chr. also for the divisions of the priests and the Levites,  for all the work of the service of the house of Jehovah,  for all the vessels of service in the house of Jehovah,
Chr. of gold by weight for the vessels of gold, for all vessels of every kind of service; of silver for all the vessels of silver by weight, for all vessels of every kind of service,
Chr. by weight also for the lampstands of gold,  for the lamps of it, of gold, by weight for every lampstand and for the lamps of it,  for the lampstands of silver, silver by weight for every lampstand and for the lamps of it, according to the use of every lampstand,
Chr. and the gold by weight for the tables of showbread, for every table,  silver for the tables of silver,
Chr. and the flesh-hooks,  the basins,  the cups, of pure gold,  for the golden bowls by weight for every bowl,  for the silver bowls by weight for every bowl,
Chr. and for the altar of incense refined gold by weight,  gold for the pattern of the chariot, even the cherubim that spread out their wings,  covered the ark of the covenant of Jehovah.
Chr. All this, David said, I have been made to understand in writing from the hand of Jehovah, even all the works of this pattern.
Chr. And David said to Solomon his son, Be strong and of good courage,  do it. Fear not, nor be dismayed, for Jehovah God, even my God, is with thee. He will not fail thee, nor forsake thee, until all the work for the service of the house of Jehovah be finished.
Chr. And, behold, there are the courses of the priests and the Levites for all the service of the house of God. And there shall be with thee in all manner of work every willing man who has skill, for any manner of service. Also the captains and all the people will be wholly at thy commandment.
Chr. And David the king said to all the assembly, Solomon my son, whom alone God has chosen, is yet young and tender,  the work is great, for the palace is not for man,  for Jehovah God.
Chr. Now I have prepared with all my might for the house of my God the gold for the things of gold,  the silver for the things of silver,  the brass for the things of brass, the iron for the things of iron,  wood for the things of wood, onyx stones,  stones to be set, stones for inlaid work,  of divers colors,  all manner of precious stones,  marble stones in abundance.
Chr. Moreover also, because I have set my affection on the house of my God, seeing that I have a treasure of my own of gold and silver, I give it to the house of my God over and above all that I have prepared for the holy house,
Chr. even three thousand talents of gold, of the gold of Ophir,  seven thousand talents of refined silver, with which to overlay the walls of the houses,
Chr. of gold for the things of gold,  of silver for the things of silver,  for all manner of work to be made by the hands of artisans. Who then offers willingly to consecrate himself this day to Jehovah?
Chr. Then the rulers of the fathers,  the rulers of the tribes of Israel,  the captains of thousands and of hundreds, with the rulers over the king's work, offered willingly.
Chr. And they gave for the service of the house of God of gold five thousand talents and ten thousand darics,  of silver ten thousand talents,  of brass eighteen thousand talents,  of iron a hundred thousand talents.
Chr. And those with whom precious stones were found gave them to the treasure of the house of Jehovah under the hand of Jehiel the Gershonite.
Chr. Then the people rejoiced, because they offered willingly, because with a perfect heart they offered willingly to Jehovah. And David the king also rejoiced with great joy.
Chr. Therefore David praised Jehovah before all the assembly. And David said, Blessed be thou, O Jehovah, the God of Israel our father, forever and ever.
Chr. Thine, O Jehovah, is the greatness,  the power,  the glory,  the victory,  the majesty, for all that is in the heavens and on the earth is thine. Thine is the kingdom, O Jehovah,  thou are exalted as head above all.
Chr. Both riches and honor come of thee,  thou rule over all. And in thy hand is power and might. And in thy hand it is to make great,  to give strength to all.
Chr. Now therefore, our God, we thank thee,  praise thy glorious name.
Chr. But who am I,  what is my people, that we should be able to offer so willingly after this sort? For all things come of thee,  of thine own have we given thee.
Chr. For we are strangers before thee,  sojourners, as all our fathers were. Our days on the earth are as a shadow,  there is no abiding.
Chr. O Jehovah our God, all this store that we have prepared to build thee a house for thy holy name comes of thy hand,  is all thine own.
Chr. I know also, my God, that thou try the heart,  have pleasure in uprightness. As for me, in the uprightness of my heart I have willingly offered all these things. And now I have seen with joy thy people, who are present here, offer willingly to thee.
Chr. O Jehovah, the God of Abraham, of Isaac,  of Israel, our fathers, keep this forever in the imagination of the thoughts of the heart of thy people,  prepare their heart to thee.
Chr. And give to Solomon my son a perfect heart, to keep thy commandments, thy testimonies,  thy statutes,  to do all these things,  to build the palace for thee, for which I have made provision.
Chr. And David said to all the assembly, Now praise Jehovah your God. And all the assembly praised Jehovah, the God of their fathers,  bowed down their heads,  did obeisance to Jehovah,  the king.
Chr. And they sacrificed sacrifices to Jehovah,  offered burnt offerings to Jehovah on the morrow after that day, even a thousand bullocks, a thousand rams,  a thousand lambs, with their drink offerings,  sacrifices in abundance for all Israel,
Chr. and ate and drank before Jehovah on that day with great gladness. And they made Solomon the son of David king the second time,  anointed him to Jehovah to be prince,  Zadok to be priest.
Chr. Then Solomon sat on the throne of Jehovah as king instead of David his father,  prospered,  all Israel obeyed him.
Chr. And all the rulers,  the mighty men,  all the sons likewise of king David, submitted themselves to Solomon the king.
Chr. And Jehovah magnified Solomon exceedingly in the sight of all Israel,  bestowed upon him such royal majesty as had not been on any king before him in Israel.
Chr. Now David the son of Jesse reigned over all Israel.
Chr. And the time that he reigned over Israel was forty years. He reigned seven years in Hebron,  he reigned thirty-three years in Jerusalem.
Chr. And he died in a good old age, full of days, riches,  honor. And Solomon his son reigned in his stead.
Chr. Now the acts of David the king, first and last, behold, they are written in the history of Samuel the seer,  in the history of Nathan the prophet,  in the history of Gad the seer,
Chr. with all his reign and his might,  the times that went over him,  over Israel,  over all the kingdoms of the countries.
II Chronicles
Chr. And Solomon the son of David was strengthened in his kingdom. And Jehovah his God was with him,  magnified him exceedingly.
Chr. And Solomon spoke to all Israel, to the captains of thousands and of hundreds,  to the judges,  to every ruler in all Israel, the heads of the fathers.
Chr. So Solomon,  all the assembly with him, went to the high place that was at Gibeon. For the tent of meeting of God was there, which Moses the servant of Jehovah had made in the wilderness.
Chr. But the ark of God David had brought up from Kiriath-jearim to the place that David had prepared for it. For he had pitched a tent for it at Jerusalem.
Chr. Moreover the brazen altar, that Bezalel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, had made, was there before the tabernacle of Jehovah. And Solomon and the assembly sought to it.
Chr. And Solomon went up there to the brazen altar before Jehovah, which was at the tent of meeting,  offered a thousand burnt offerings upon it.
Chr. In that night God appeared to Solomon,  said to him, Ask what I shall give thee.
Chr. And Solomon said to God, Thou have shown great loving kindness to David my father,  have made me king in his stead.
Chr. Now, O Jehovah God, let thy promise to David my father be established. For thou have made me king over a people like the dust of the earth in multitude.
Chr. Give me now wisdom and knowledge, that I may go out and come in before this people. For who can judge this thy people, that is so great?
Chr. And God said to Solomon, Because this was in thy heart,  thou have not asked riches, wealth, or honor, nor the life of those who hate thee, neither yet have asked long life,  have asked wisdom and knowledge for thyself, that thou may judge my people over whom I have made thee king,
Chr. wisdom and knowledge are granted to thee. And I will give thee riches,  wealth,  honor, such as none of the kings have had who have been before thee, neither shall any after thee have the like.
Chr. So Solomon came from the high place that was at Gibeon, from before the tent of meeting, to Jerusalem,  he reigned over Israel.
Chr. And Solomon gathered chariots and horsemen. And he had a thousand and four hundred chariots,  twelve thousand horsemen, that he placed in the chariot cities,  with the king at Jerusalem.
Chr. And the king made silver and gold to be in Jerusalem as stones,  cedars he made to be as the sycamore trees that are in the lowland, for abundance.
Chr. And the horses which Solomon had were brought out of Egypt. The king's merchants received them in herds, each herd at a price.
Chr. And they went after and brought out of Egypt a chariot for six hundred shekels of silver,  a horse for a hundred and fifty. And so they brought them out by their means for all the kings of the Hittites,  the kings of Syria.
Chr. Now Solomon purposed to build a house for the name of Jehovah,  a house for his kingdom.
Chr. And Solomon counted out seventy thousand men to bear burdens,  eighty thousand men who were hewers in the mountains,  three thousand and six hundred to oversee them.
Chr. And Solomon sent to Huram the king of Tyre, saying, As thou dealt with David my father,  sent him cedars to build for him a house to dwell therein, so with me.
Chr. Behold, I am about to build a house for the name of Jehovah my God, to dedicate it to him,  to burn before him incense of sweet spices,  for the continual showbread,  for the burnt offerings morning and evening, on the sabbaths,  on the new moons,  on the set feasts of Jehovah our God. This is an ordinance forever to Israel.
Chr. And the house which I build is great. For our God is great above all gods.
Chr. But who is able to build for him a house, seeing heaven and the heaven of heavens cannot contain him? Who am I then, that I should build for him a house, except only to burn incense before him?
Chr. Now therefore send me a man skilful to work in gold,  in silver,  in brass,  in iron,  in purple,  crimson,  blue,  who knows how to engrave engravings, to be with the skilful men who are with me in Judah and in Jerusalem, whom David my father provided.
Chr. Send to me also cedar trees, fir trees,  algum trees, out of Lebanon. For I know that thy servants know how to cut timber in Lebanon. And, behold, my servants shall be with thy servants,
Chr. even to prepare for me timber in abundance. For the house which I am about to build shall be great and wonderful.
Chr. And, behold, I will give to thy servants, the hewers who cut timber, twenty thousand measures of beaten wheat,  twenty thousand measures of barley,  twenty thousand baths of wine,  twenty thousand baths of oil.
Chr. Then Huram the king of Tyre answered in writing, which he sent to Solomon, Because Jehovah loves his people, he has made thee king over them.
Chr. Huram said moreover, Blessed be Jehovah, the God of Israel, that made heaven and earth, who has given to David the king a wise son, endued with discretion and understanding, that should build a house for Jehovah,  a house for his kingdom.
Chr. And now I have sent a skilful man, endued with understanding, of Huram my father's,
Chr. the son of a woman of the daughters of Dan. And his father was a man of Tyre, skilful to work in gold,  in silver, in brass, in iron, in stone,  in timber, in purple, in blue,  in fine linen,  in crimson, also to engrave any manner of engraving,  to devise any device, that there may be a place appointed to him with thy skilful men,  with the skilful men of my lord David thy father.
Chr. Now therefore the wheat and the barley, the oil and the wine, which my lord has spoken of, let him send to his servants.
Chr. And we will cut wood out of Lebanon, as much as thou shall need. And we will bring it to thee in floats by sea to Joppa,  thou shall carry it up to Jerusalem.
Chr. And Solomon numbered all the aliens that were in the land of Israel, after the numbering with which David his father had numbered them. And they were found a hundred and fifty-three thousand and six hundred.
Chr. And he set seventy thousand of them to bear burdens,  eighty thousand who were hewers in the mountains,  three thousand and six hundred overseers to set the people to work.
Chr. Then Solomon began to build the house of Jehovah at Jerusalem on mount Moriah, where Jehovah appeared to David his father, which he made ready in the place that David had appointed, in the threshing-floor of Ornan the Jebusite.
Chr. And he began to build in the second day of the second month, in the fourth year of his reign.
Chr. Now these are the foundations which Solomon laid for the building of the house of God. The length by cubits after the first measure was sixty cubits,  the breadth twenty cubits.
Chr. And the porch that was before the house, the length of it, according to the breadth of the house, was twenty cubits,  the height a hundred and twenty. And he overlaid it inside with pure gold.
Chr. And the greater house he ceiled with fir-wood, which he overlaid with fine gold,  wrought thereon palm trees and chains.
Chr. And he garnished the house with precious stones for beauty. And the gold was gold of Parvaim.
Chr. He also overlaid the house, the beams, the thresholds,  the walls of it,  the doors of it, with gold,  engraved cherubim on the walls.
Chr. And he made the most holy house; the length of it, according to the breadth of the house, was twenty cubits,  the breadth of it twenty cubits. And he overlaid it with fine gold, amounting to six hundred talents.
Chr. And the weight of the nails was fifty shekels of gold. And he overlaid the upper chambers with gold.
Chr. And in the most holy house he made two cherubim of image work,  they overlaid them with gold.
Chr. And the wings of the cherubim were twenty cubits long; the wing of the one was five cubits, reaching to the wall of the house,  the other wing was likewise five cubits, reaching to the wing of the other cherub.
Chr. And the wing of the other cherub was five cubits, reaching to the wall of the house,  the other wing was five cubits also, joining to the wing of the other cherub.
Chr. The wings of these cherubim spread themselves forth twenty cubits. And they stood on their feet,  their faces were toward the house.
Chr. And he made the veil of blue,  purple,  crimson,  fine linen,  wrought cherubim thereon.
Chr. Also he made two pillars before the house of thirty-five cubits in length,  the capital that was on the top of each of them was five cubits.
Chr. And he made chains in the oracle,  put them on the tops of the pillars. And he made a hundred pomegranates,  put them on the chains.
Chr. And he set up the pillars before the temple, one on the right hand,  the other on the left. And called the name of that on the right hand Jachin,  the name of that on the left Boaz.
Chr. Moreover he made an altar of brass, twenty cubits the length of it,  twenty cubits the breadth of it,  ten cubits the height of it.
Chr. Also he made the molten sea of ten cubits from brim to brim, round in compass. And the height of it was five cubits,  a line of thirty cubits encompassed it round about.
Chr. And under it was the likeness of oxen, which compassed it round about for ten cubits, encompassing the sea round about. The oxen were in two rows, cast when it was cast.
Chr. It stood upon twelve oxen, three looking toward the north,  three looking toward the west,  three looking toward the south,  three looking toward the east. And the sea was set upon them above,  all their hinder parts were inward.
Chr. And it was a handbreadth thick. And the brim of it was wrought like the brim of a cup, like the flower of a lily. It received and held three thousand baths.
Chr. He also made ten basins,  put five on the right hand,  five on the left, to wash in them. They washed in them such things as belonged to the burnt offering,  the sea was for the priests to wash in.
Chr. And he made the ten lampstands of gold according to the ordinance concerning them. And he set them in the temple, five on the right hand,  five on the left.
Chr. He made also ten tables,  placed them in the temple, five on the right side,  five on the left. And he made a hundred basins of gold.
Chr. Furthermore he made the court of the priests,  the great court,  doors for the court,  overlaid the doors of them with brass.
Chr. And he set the sea on the right side of the house eastward, toward the south.
Chr. And Huram made the pots,  the shovels,  the basins. So Huram made an end of doing the work that he wrought for king Solomon in the house of God:
Chr. the two pillars,  the bowls,  the two capitals which were on the top of the pillars,  the two networks to cover the two bowls of the capitals that were on the top of the pillars,
Chr. and the four hundred pomegranates for the two networks, two rows of pomegranates for each network to cover the two bowls of the capitals that were upon the pillars.
Chr. He also made the bases,  he made the lavers upon the bases,
Chr. one sea,  the twelve oxen under it.
Chr. Also the pots,  the shovels,  the flesh-hooks,  all the vessels of it, Huram his father made of bright brass for king Solomon for the house of Jehovah.
Chr. The king cast them in the plain of the Jordan, in the clay ground between Succoth and Zeredah.
Chr. Thus Solomon made all these vessels in great abundance. For the weight of the brass could not be found out.
Chr. And Solomon made all the vessels that were in the house of God, also the golden altar,  the tables on which was the showbread,
Chr. and the lampstands with their lamps, to burn according to the ordinance before the oracle, of pure gold,
Chr. and the flowers,  the lamps,  the tongs, of gold,  that perfect gold,
Chr. and the snuffers,  the basins,  the spoons,  the fire pans, of pure gold. And as for the entry of the house, the inner doors of it for the most holy place,  the doors of the house, namely, of the temple, were of gold.
Chr. Thus all the work that Solomon wrought for the house of Jehovah was finished. And Solomon brought in the things that David his father had dedicated, even the silver,  the gold,  all the vessels,  put them in the treasuries of the house of God.
Chr. Then Solomon assembled the elders of Israel,  all the heads of the tribes, the rulers of the fathers of the sons of Israel, to Jerusalem, to bring up the ark of the covenant of Jehovah out of the city of David, which is Zion.
Chr. And all the men of Israel assembled themselves to the king at the feast, which was in the seventh month.
Chr. And all the elders of Israel came. And the Levites took up the ark.
Chr. And they brought up the ark,  the tent of meeting,  all the holy vessels that were in the tent. These the priests the Levites brought up.
Chr. And king Solomon and all the congregation of Israel that were assembled to him, were before the ark, sacrificing sheep and oxen that could not be counted nor numbered for multitude.
Chr. And the priests brought in the ark of the covenant of Jehovah to its place, into the oracle of the house, to the most holy place, even under the wings of the cherubim.
Chr. For the cherubim spread forth their wings over the place of the ark,  the cherubim covered the ark and the staves of it above.
Chr. And the staves were so long that the ends of the staves were seen from the ark before the oracle,  they were not seen outside. And there it is to this day.
Chr. There was nothing in the ark except the two tablets which Moses put there at Horeb when Jehovah made a covenant with the sons of Israel, when they came out of Egypt.
Chr. And it came to pass, when the priests came out of the holy place, (for all the priests that were present had sanctified themselves,  did not keep their divisions.
Chr. Also the Levites who were the singers, all of them, even Asaph, Heman, Jeduthun,  their sons and their brothers, arrayed in fine linen, with cymbals and psalteries and harps, stood at the east end of the altar,  with them a hundred and twenty priests sounding with trumpets),
Chr. it came to pass, when the trumpeters and singers were as one, to make one sound to be heard in praising and thanking Jehovah. And when they lifted up their voice with the trumpets and cymbals and instruments of music,  praised Jehovah, saying, For he is good. For his loving kindness is forever, that the house was then filled with a cloud, even the house of Jehovah,
Chr. so that the priests could not stand to minister because of the cloud. For the glory of Jehovah filled the house of God.
Chr. Then Solomon spoke, Jehovah has said that he would dwell in the thick darkness.
Chr. But I have built for thee a house of habitation,  a place for thee to dwell in forever.
Chr. And the king turned his face,  blessed all the assembly of Israel. And all the assembly of Israel stood.
Chr. And he said, Blessed be Jehovah, the God of Israel, who spoke with his mouth to David my father,  has with his hands fulfilled it, saying,
Chr. Since the day that I brought forth my people out of the land of Egypt, I chose no city out of all the tribes of Israel to build a house in that my name might be there. Neither did I choose any man to be ruler over my people Israel.
Chr. But I have chosen Jerusalem that my name might be there. And have chosen David to be over my people Israel.
Chr. Now it was in the heart of David my father to build a house for the name of Jehovah, the God of Israel.
Chr. But Jehovah said to David my father, Whereas it was in thy heart to build a house for my name, thou did well that it was in thy heart.
Chr. Nevertheless thou shall not build the house,  thy son who shall come forth out of thy loins, he shall build the house for my name.
Chr. And Jehovah has performed his word that he spoke. For I have risen up in the place of David my father,  sit on the throne of Israel, as Jehovah promised,  have built the house for the name of Jehovah, the God of Israel.
Chr. And there I have set the ark in which is the covenant of Jehovah, which he made with the sons of Israel.
Chr. And he stood before the altar of Jehovah in the presence of all the assembly of Israel,  spread forth his hands.
Chr. For Solomon had made a brazen scaffold, five cubits long,  five cubits broad,  three cubits high,  had set it in the midst of the court. And upon it he stood,  knelt down upon his knees before all the assembly of Israel,  spread forth his hands toward heaven.
Chr. And he said, O Jehovah, the God of Israel, there is no God like thee, in heaven, or on earth, who keep covenant and loving kindness with thy servants, who walk before thee with all their heart,
Chr. who have kept with thy servant David my father that which thou promised him. Yea, thou spoke with thy mouth,  have fulfilled it with thy hand, as it is this day.
Chr. Now therefore, O Jehovah, the God of Israel, keep with thy servant David my father that which thou have promised him, saying, There shall not fail thee a man in my sight to sit on the throne of Israel, if only thy sons take heed to their way, to walk in my law as thou have walked before me.
Chr. Now therefore, O Jehovah, the God of Israel, let thy word be verified, which thou spoke to thy servant David.
Chr. But will God in very deed dwell with men on the earth? Behold, heaven and the heaven of heavens cannot contain thee. How much less this house which I have built!
Chr. Yet have thou respect to the prayer of thy servant,  to his supplication, O Jehovah my God, to hearken to the cry and to the prayer which thy servant prays before thee,
Chr. that thine eyes may be open toward this house day and night, even toward the place of which thou have said that thou would put thy name there, to hearken to the prayer which thy servant shall pray toward this place.
Chr. And hearken thou to the supplications of thy servant,  of thy people Israel, when they shall pray toward this place. Yea, hear thou from thy dwelling-place, even from heaven,  when thou hear forgive.
Chr. If a man sins against his neighbor,  an oath be laid upon him to cause him to swear,  he comes and swears before thine altar in this house,
Chr. then hear thou from heaven,  do,  judge thy servants, requiting the wicked, to bring his way upon his own head,  justifying the righteous, to give him according to his righteousness.
Chr. And if thy people Israel be smitten down before the enemy because they have sinned against thee,  shall turn again and confess thy name,  pray and make supplication before thee in this house,
Chr. then hear thou from heaven,  forgive the sin of thy people Israel,  bring them again to the land which thou gave to them and to their fathers.
Chr. When the heavens are shut up,  there is no rain, because they have sinned against thee, if they pray toward this place,  confess thy name,  turn from their sin when thou do afflict them,
Chr. then hear thou in heaven,  forgive the sin of thy servants,  of thy people Israel, when thou teach them the good way wherein they should walk,  send rain upon thy land, which thou have given to thy people for an inheritance.
Chr. If there be in the land famine, if there be pestilence, if there be blight or mildew, locust or caterpillar, if their enemies besiege them in the land of their cities, whatever plague or whatever sickness there be,
Chr. whatever prayer and supplication be made by any man, or by all thy people Israel, who shall know every man his own plague and his own sorrow,  shall spread forth his hands toward this house,
Chr. then hear thou from heaven thy dwelling-place and forgive,  render to every man according to all his ways, whose heart thou know, (for thou, even thou only, know the hearts of the sons of men),
Chr. that they may fear thee, to walk in thy ways so long as they live in the land which thou gave to our fathers.
Chr. Moreover concerning the foreigner, who is not of thy people Israel, when he shall come from a far country for thy great name's sake,  thy mighty hand,  thine outstretched arm, when they shall come and pray toward this house,
Chr. then hear thou from heaven, even from thy dwelling-place,  do according to all that the foreigner calls to thee for, that all the peoples of the earth may know thy name,  fear thee, as do thy people Israel,  that they may know that this house which I have built is called by thy name.
Chr. If thy people go out to battle against their enemies, by whatever way thou shall send them,  they pray to thee toward this city which thou have chosen,  the house which I have built for thy name,
Chr. then hear thou from heaven their prayer and their supplication,  maintain their cause.
Chr. If they sin against thee (for there is no man that sins not),  thou be angry with them,  deliver them to the enemy, so that they carry them away captive to a land far off or near,
Chr. yet if they shall rethink themselves in the land where they are carried captive,  turn again,  make supplication to thee in the land of their captivity, saying, We have sinned, we have done perversely,  have dealt wickedly,
Chr. if they return to thee with all their heart and with all their soul in the land of their captivity where they have carried them captive,  pray toward their land, which thou gave to their fathers,  the city which thou have chosen,  toward the house which I have built for thy name,
Chr. then hear thou from heaven, even from thy dwelling-place, their prayer and their supplications,  maintain their case,  forgive thy people who have sinned against thee.
Chr. Now, O my God, let, I beseech thee, thine eyes be open,  let thine ears be attendant to the prayer that is made in this place.
Chr. Now therefore arise, O Jehovah God, into thy resting-place, thou,  the ark of thy strength. Let thy priests, O Jehovah God, be clothed with salvation,  let thy sanctified rejoice in goodness.
Chr. O Jehovah God, do not turn away the face of thine anointed. Remember thy loving kindnesses to David thy servant.
Chr. Now when Solomon had made an end of praying, the fire came down from heaven,  consumed the burnt offering and the sacrifices. And the glory of Jehovah filled the house.
Chr. And the priests could not enter into the house of Jehovah, because the glory of Jehovah filled Jehovah's house.
Chr. And all the sons of Israel looked on when the fire came down,  the glory of Jehovah was upon the house. And they bowed themselves with their faces to the ground upon the pavement,  worshiped,  gave thanks to Jehovah, saying, For he is good. For his loving kindness is forever.
Chr. Then the king and all the people offered sacrifice before Jehovah.
Chr. And king Solomon offered a sacrifice of twenty-two thousand oxen,  a hundred and twenty thousand sheep. So the king and all the people dedicated the house of God.
Chr. And the priests stood according to their offices, also the Levites with instruments of music of Jehovah, which David the king had made to give thanks to Jehovah (for his loving kindness is forever) when David praised by their ministry,  the priests sounded trumpets before them. And all Israel stood.
Chr. Moreover Solomon hallowed the middle of the court that was before the house of Jehovah. For there he offered the burnt offerings,  the fat of the peace offerings, because the brazen altar which Solomon had made was not able to receive the burnt offering,  the meal offering,  the fat.
Chr. So Solomon held the feast at that time seven days,  all Israel with him, a very great assembly, from the entrance of Hamath to the brook of Egypt.
Chr. And on the eighth day they held a solemn assembly. For they kept the dedication of the altar seven days,  the feast seven days.
Chr. And on the twenty-third day of the seventh month he sent the people away to their tents, joyful and glad of heart for the goodness that Jehovah had shown to David,  to Solomon,  to Israel his people.
Chr. Thus Solomon finished the house of Jehovah,  the king's house. And all that came into Solomon's heart to make in the house of Jehovah,  in his own house, he caused to prosper.
Chr. And Jehovah appeared to Solomon by night,  said to him, I have heard thy prayer,  have chosen this place to myself for a house of sacrifice.
Chr. If I shut up the heavens so that there is no rain, or if I command the locust to devour the land, or if I send pestilence among my people,
Chr. if my people, who are called by my name, shall humble themselves,  pray,  seek my face,  turn from their wicked ways, then I will hear from heaven,  will forgive their sin,  will heal their land.
Chr. Now my eyes shall be open,  my ears attend to the prayer that is made in this place.
Chr. For now I have chosen and hallowed this house, that my name may be there forever,  my eyes and my heart shall be there perpetually.
Chr. And as for thee, if thou will walk before me as David thy father walked,  do according to all that I have commanded thee,  will keep my statutes and mine ordinances,
Chr. then I will establish the throne of thy kingdom, according as I covenanted with David thy father, saying, There shall not fail thee a man to be ruler in Israel.
Chr. But if ye turn away,  forsake my statutes and my commandments which I have set before you,  shall go and serve other gods,  worship them,
Chr. then I will pluck them up by the roots out of my land which I have given them. And this house, which I have hallowed for my name, I will cast out of my sight,  I will make it a proverb and a byword among all peoples.
Chr. And this house, which is so high, everyone who passes by it shall be astonished,  shall say, Why has Jehovah done thus to this land,  to this house?
Chr. And they shall answer, Because they forsook Jehovah, the God of their fathers, who brought them forth out of the land of Egypt,  laid hold on other gods,  worshiped them,  served them; therefore he has brought all this evil upon them.
Chr. And it came to pass at the end of twenty years, in which Solomon had built the house of Jehovah,  his own house,
Chr. that the cities which Huram had given to Solomon, Solomon built them,  caused the sons of Israel to dwell there.
Chr. And Solomon went to Hamath-zobah,  prevailed against it.
Chr. And he built Tadmor in the wilderness,  all the store-cities, which he built in Hamath.
Chr. Also he built Beth-horon the upper,  Beth-horon the lower, fortified cities, with walls, gates,  bars,
Chr. and Baalath,  all the store-cities that Solomon had,  all the cities for his chariots,  the cities for his horsemen,  all that Solomon desired to build for his pleasure in Jerusalem,  in Lebanon,  in all the land of his dominion.
Chr. As for all the people who were left of the Hittites,  the Amorites,  the Perizzites,  the Hivites,  the Jebusites, that were not of Israel,
Chr. of their sons who were left after them in the land whom the sons of Israel did not consumed, of them Solomon raised a levy of bondservants to this day.
Chr. But Solomon made no servants of the sons of Israel for his work,  they were men of war,  chief of his captains,  rulers of his chariots and of his horsemen.
Chr. And these were the chief officers of king Solomon, even two hundred and fifty that bore rule over the people.
Chr. And Solomon brought up the daughter of Pharaoh out of the city of David to the house that he had built for her. For he said, My wife shall not dwell in the house of David king of Israel, because the places are holy in which the ark of Jehovah has come.
Chr. Then Solomon offered burnt offerings to Jehovah on the altar of Jehovah, which he had built before the porch,
Chr. even as the duty of every day required, offering according to the commandment of Moses, on the sabbaths,  on the new moons,  on the set feasts, three times in the year, even in the feast of unleavened bread,  in the feast of weeks,  in the feast of tabernacles.
Chr. And he appointed, according to the ordinance of David his father, the divisions of the priests to their service,  the Levites to their offices, to praise,  to minister before the priests, as the duty of every day required, also the porters by their divisions at every gate. For so David the man of God had commanded.
Chr. And they did not depart from the commandment of the king to the priests and Levites concerning any matter, or concerning the treasures.
Chr. Now all the work of Solomon was prepared from the day of the foundation of the house of Jehovah,  until it was finished. So the house of Jehovah was completed.
Chr. Then Solomon went to Ezion-geber,  to Eloth, on the seashore in the land of Edom.
Chr. And Huram sent ships to him by the hands of his servants,  servants who had knowledge of the sea. And they came with the servants of Solomon to Ophir,  fetched from there four hundred and fifty talents of gold,  brought them to king Solomon.
Chr. And when the queen of Sheba heard of the fame of Solomon, she came to test Solomon with hard questions at Jerusalem, with a very great caravan,  camels that bore spices,  gold in abundance,  precious stones. And when she came to Solomon, she conversed with him of all that was in her heart.
Chr. And Solomon answered to her all her questions. And there was not anything hid from Solomon that he did not answer her.
Chr. And when the queen of Sheba had seen the wisdom of Solomon,  the house that he had built,
Chr. and the food of his table,  the seating of his servants,  the attendance of his ministers,  their apparel, also his cupbearers,  their apparel,  his ascent by which he went up to the house of Jehovah, there was no more spirit in her.
Chr. And she said to the king, It was a true report that I heard in my own land of thine acts,  of thy wisdom.
Chr. However I did not believe their words until I came,  my eyes had seen it. And, behold, the half of the greatness of thy wisdom was not told me. Thou exceed the fame that I heard.
Chr. Happy are thy men,  happy are these thy servants, who stand continually before thee,  hear thy wisdom.
Chr. Blessed be Jehovah thy God, who delighted in thee, to set thee on his throne to be king for Jehovah thy God. Because thy God loved Israel, to establish them forever, therefore he made thee king over them, to do justice and righteousness.
Chr. And she gave the king a hundred and twenty talents of gold,  spices in great abundance,  precious stones. Neither was there any such spice as the queen of Sheba gave to king Solomon.
Chr. And also the servants of Huram,  the servants of Solomon, who brought gold from Ophir, brought algum trees and precious stones.
Chr. And the king made of the algum trees terraces for the house of Jehovah,  for the king's house,  harps and psalteries for the singers. And there were none such seen before in the land of Judah.
Chr. And king Solomon gave to the queen of Sheba all her desire, whatever she asked, besides that which she had brought to the king. So she turned,  went to her own land, she and her servants.
Chr. Now the weight of gold that came to Solomon in one year was six hundred and sixty-six talents of gold,
Chr. besides that which the traders and merchants brought. And all the kings of Arabia and the governors of the country brought gold and silver to Solomon.
Chr. And king Solomon made two hundred bucklers of beaten gold; six hundred shekels of beaten gold went to one buckler.
Chr. And he made three hundred shields of beaten gold; three hundred shekels of gold went to one shield. And the king put them in the house of the forest of Lebanon.
Chr. Moreover the king made a great throne of ivory,  overlaid it with pure gold.
Chr. And there were six steps to the throne, with a footstool of gold, which were fastened to the throne,  supports on either side by the place of the seat,  two lions standing beside the supports.
Chr. And twelve lions stood there on the one side and on the other upon the six steps. There was not the like made in any kingdom.
Chr. And all king Solomon's drinking vessels were of gold,  all the vessels of the house of the forest of Lebanon were of pure gold; silver was accounted of nothing in the days of Solomon.
Chr. For the king had ships that went to Tarshish with the servants of Huram. Once every three years the ships of Tarshish came, bringing gold,  silver, ivory,  apes,  peacocks.
Chr. So king Solomon exceeded all the kings of the earth in riches and wisdom.
Chr. And all the kings of the earth sought the presence of Solomon, to hear his wisdom, which God had put in his heart.
Chr. And they brought every man his tribute, vessels of silver,  vessels of gold,  raiment, armor,  spices, horses,  mules, a rate year by year.
Chr. And Solomon had four thousand stalls for horses and chariots,  twelve thousand horsemen, that he bestowed in the chariot cities,  with the king at Jerusalem.
Chr. And he ruled over all the kings from the River even to the land of the Philistines,  to the border of Egypt.
Chr. And the king made silver to be in Jerusalem as stones,  he made cedars to be as the sycamore trees that are in the lowland, for abundance.
Chr. And they brought horses for Solomon out of Egypt,  out of all lands.
Chr. Now the rest of the acts of Solomon, first and last, are they not written in the history of Nathan the prophet,  in the prophecy of Ahijah the Shilonite,  in the visions of Iddo the seer concerning Jeroboam the son of Nebat?
Chr. And Solomon reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel forty years.
Chr. And Solomon slept with his fathers,  he was buried in the city of David his father. And Rehoboam his son reigned in his stead.
Chr. And Rehoboam went to Shechem. For all Israel came to Shechem to make him king.
Chr. And it came to pass, when Jeroboam the son of Nebat heard of it, (for he was in Egypt, from where he had fled from the presence of king Solomon), that Jeroboam returned out of Egypt.
Chr. And they sent and called him. And Jeroboam and all Israel came,  they spoke to Rehoboam, saying,
Chr. Thy father made our yoke grievous. Now therefore make thou the grievous service of thy father,  his heavy yoke which he put upon us, lighter,  we will serve thee.
Chr. And he said to them, Come again to me after three days. And the people departed.
Chr. And king Rehoboam took counsel with the old men that had stood before Solomon his father while he yet lived, saying, What counsel do ye give me to return an answer to this people?
Chr. And they spoke to him, saying, If thou be kind to this people,  please them,  speak good words to them, then they will be thy servants forever.
Chr. But he forsook the counsel of the old men which they had given him,  took counsel with the young men that grew up with him, who stood before him.
Chr. And he said to them, What counsel do ye give, that we may return an answer to this people who have spoken to me, saying, Make the yoke that thy father put upon us lighter?
Chr. And the young men that grew up with him spoke to him, saying, Thus shall thou say to the people who spoke to thee, saying, Thy father made our yoke heavy,  make thou it lighter to us. Thus shall thou say to them, My little finger is thicker than my father's loins.
Chr. And now whereas my father burdened you with a heavy yoke, I will add to your yoke. My father chastised you with whips,  I with scorpions.
Chr. So Jeroboam and all the people came to Rehoboam the third day, as the king bade, saying, Come to me again the third day.
Chr. And the king answered them roughly. And king Rehoboam forsook the counsel of the old men,
Chr. and spoke to them after the counsel of the young men, saying, My father made your yoke heavy,  I will add thereto. My father chastised you with whips,  I with scorpions.
Chr. So the king did not hearken to the people. For it was brought about by God, that Jehovah might establish his word, which he spoke by Ahijah the Shilonite to Jeroboam the son of Nebat.
Chr. And when all Israel saw that the king did not hearken to them, the people answered the king, saying, What portion have we in David? Neither have we inheritance in the son of Jesse. Every man to your tents, O Israel. Now see to thine own house, David. So all Israel departed to their tents.
Chr. But as for the sons of Israel who dwelt in the cities of Judah, Rehoboam reigned over them.
Chr. Then king Rehoboam sent Hadoram, who was over the men subject to task work. And the sons of Israel stoned him to death with stones. And king Rehoboam made speed to get him up to his chariot, to flee to Jerusalem.
Chr. So Israel rebelled against the house of David to this day.
Chr. And when Rehoboam came to Jerusalem, he assembled the house of Judah and Benjamin, a hundred and eighty thousand chosen men, who were warriors, to fight against Israel, to bring the kingdom again to Rehoboam.
Chr. But the word of Jehovah came to Shemaiah the man of God, saying,
Chr. Speak to Rehoboam the son of Solomon, king of Judah,  to all Israel in Judah and Benjamin, saying,
Chr. Thus says Jehovah, Ye shall not go up, nor fight against your brothers. Return every man to his house. For this thing is of me. So they hearkened to the words of Jehovah,  returned from going against Jeroboam.
Chr. And Rehoboam dwelt in Jerusalem,  built cities for defense in Judah.
Chr. He built Bethlehem,  Etam,  Tekoa,
Chr. And Beth-zur,  Soco,  Adullam,
Chr. and Gath,  Mareshah,  Ziph,
Chr. and Adoraim,  Lachish,  Azekah,
Chr. and Zorah,  Aijalon,  Hebron, which are in Judah and in Benjamin, fortified cities.
Chr. And he fortified the strongholds,  put captains in them,  stores of victuals,  oil and wine.
Chr. And in every city he put shields and spears,  made them exceedingly strong. And Judah and Benjamin belonged to him.
Chr. And the priests and the Levites who were in all Israel resorted to him out of all their border.
Chr. For the Levites left their suburbs and their possession,  came to Judah and Jerusalem. For Jeroboam and his sons cast them off, that they should not execute the priest's office to Jehovah.
Chr. And he appointed priests for him for the high places,  for the he-goats,  for the calves which he had made.
Chr. And after them, such as set their hearts to seek Jehovah, the God of Israel, came to Jerusalem out of all the tribes of Israel to sacrifice to Jehovah, the God of their fathers.
Chr. So they strengthened the kingdom of Judah,  made Rehoboam the son of Solomon strong three years. For they walked three years in the way of David and Solomon.
Chr. And Rehoboam took him a wife, Mahalath the daughter of Jerimoth the son of David,  of Abihail the daughter of Eliab the son of Jesse.
Chr. And she bore sons for him: Jeush,  Shemariah,  Zaham.
Chr. And after her he took Maacah the daughter of Absalom. And she bore for him Abijah,  Attai,  Ziza,  Shelomith.
Chr. And Rehoboam loved Maacah the daughter of Absalom above all his wives and his concubines. For he took eighteen wives,  thirty concubines,  begot twenty-eight sons and thirty daughters.
Chr. And Rehoboam appointed Abijah the son of Maacah to be chief, the ruler among his brothers. For he intended to make him king.
Chr. And he dealt wisely,  dispersed all his sons throughout all the lands of Judah and Benjamin, to every fortified city. And he gave them provisions in abundance. And he sought for them many wives.
Chr. And it came to pass, when the kingdom of Rehoboam was established,  he was strong, that he forsook the law of Jehovah,  all Israel with him.
Chr. And it came to pass in the fifth year of king Rehoboam, that Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem, because they had trespassed against Jehovah,
Chr. with twelve hundred chariots,  thirty thousand horsemen. And the people were without number who came with him out of Egypt: the Lubim, the Sukkiim,  the Ethiopians.
Chr. And he took the fortified cities which pertained to Judah,  came to Jerusalem.
Chr. Now Shemaiah the prophet came to Rehoboam,  to the rulers of Judah, who were gathered together to Jerusalem because of Shishak,  said to them, Thus says Jehovah, Ye have forsaken me, therefore I have also left you in the hand of Shishak.
Chr. Then the rulers of Israel and the king humbled themselves,  they said, Jehovah is righteous.
Chr. And when Jehovah saw that they humbled themselves, the word of Jehovah came to Shemaiah, saying, They have humbled themselves. I will not destroy them,  I will grant them some deliverance,  my wrath shall not be poured out upon Jerusalem by the hand of Shishak.
Chr. Nevertheless they shall be his servants, that they may know my service,  the service of the kingdoms of the countries.
Chr. So Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem,  took away the treasures of the house of Jehovah,  the treasures of the king's house; he took all away. He also took away the shields of gold which Solomon had made.
Chr. And king Rehoboam made in their stead shields of brass,  committed them to the hands of the captains of the guard that kept the door of the king's house.
Chr. And it was so, that, as often as the king entered into the house of Jehovah, the guard came and bore them,  brought them back into the guard-chamber.
Chr. And when he humbled himself, the wrath of Jehovah turned from him, so as not to destroy him altogether. And moreover in Judah there were good things.
Chr. So king Rehoboam strengthened himself in Jerusalem,  reigned. For Rehoboam was forty-one years old when he began to reign,  he reigned seventeen years in Jerusalem, the city which Jehovah had chosen out of all the tribes of Israel to put his name there. And his mother's name was Naamah the Ammonitess.
Chr. And he did that which was evil, because he did not set his heart to seek Jehovah.
Chr. Now the acts of Rehoboam, first and last, are they not written in the histories of Shemaiah the prophet and of Iddo the seer, after the manner of genealogies? And there were wars between Rehoboam and Jeroboam continually.
Chr. And Rehoboam slept with his fathers,  was buried in the city of David. And Abijah his son reigned in his stead.
Chr. In the eighteenth year of king Jeroboam, Abijah began to reign over Judah.
Chr. He reigned three years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Micaiah the daughter of Uriel of Gibeah. And there was war between Abijah and Jeroboam.
Chr. And Abijah joined battle with an army of valiant men of war, even four hundred thousand chosen men. And Jeroboam set the battle in array against him with eight hundred thousand chosen men who were mighty men of valor.
Chr. And Abijah stood up upon mount Zemaraim, which is in the hill-country of Ephraim,  said, Hear me, O Jeroboam and all Israel.
Chr. Should ye not know that Jehovah, the God of Israel, gave the kingdom over Israel to David forever, even to him and to his sons by a covenant of salt?
Chr. Yet Jeroboam the son of Nebat, the servant of Solomon the son of David, rose up,  rebelled against his lord.
Chr. And there were gathered to him worthless men, base fellows, who strengthened themselves against Rehoboam the son of Solomon when Rehoboam was young and tender-hearted,  could not withstand them.
Chr. And now ye think to withstand the kingdom of Jehovah in the hand of the sons of David,  ye are a great multitude,  there are with you the golden calves which Jeroboam made you for gods.
Chr. Have ye not driven out the priests of Jehovah, the sons of Aaron,  the Levites,  made priests for you after the manner of the peoples of other lands? So that whoever comes to consecrate himself with a young bullock and seven rams, the same may be a priest of them that are no gods.
Chr. But as for us, Jehovah is our God,  we have not forsaken him. And we have priests ministering to Jehovah, the sons of Aaron,  the Levites in their work.
Chr. And they burn to Jehovah every morning and every evening burnt offerings and sweet incense. Also they set the showbread in order upon the pure table,  the lampstand of gold with the lamps of it to burn every evening. For we keep the charge of Jehovah our God,  ye have forsaken him.
Chr. And, behold, God is with us at our head,  his priests with the trumpets of alarm to sound an alarm against you. O sons of Israel, fight ye not against Jehovah, the God of your fathers. For ye shall not prosper.
Chr. But Jeroboam caused an ambushment to come around behind them, so they were before Judah,  the ambushment was behind them.
Chr. And when Judah looked back, behold, the battle was before and behind them. And they cried to Jehovah,  the priests sounded with the trumpets.
Chr. Then the men of Judah gave a shout. And as the men of Judah shouted, it came to pass, that God smote Jeroboam and all Israel before Abijah and Judah.
Chr. And the sons of Israel fled before Judah,  God delivered them into their hand.
Chr. And Abijah and his people killed them with a great slaughter. So there fell down slain of Israel five hundred thousand chosen men.
Chr. Thus the sons of Israel were brought under at that time,  the sons of Judah prevailed, because they relied upon Jehovah, the God of their fathers.
Chr. And Abijah pursued after Jeroboam,  took cities from him, Bethel with the towns of it,  Jeshanah with the towns of it,  Ephron with the towns of it.
Chr. Neither did Jeroboam recover strength again in the days of Abijah. And Jehovah smote him,  he died.
Chr. But Abijah grew mighty,  took to himself fourteen wives,  begot twenty-two sons,  sixteen daughters.
Chr. And the rest of the acts of Abijah,  his ways,  his sayings, are written in the commentary of the prophet Iddo.
Chr. So Abijah slept with his fathers,  they buried him in the city of David. And Asa his son reigned in his stead. In his days the land was quiet ten years.
Chr. And Asa did that which was good and right in the eyes of Jehovah his God.
Chr. For he took away the foreign altars,  the high places,  broke down the pillars,  hewed down the Asherim,
Chr. and commanded Judah to seek Jehovah, the God of their fathers,  to do the law and the commandment.
Chr. Also he took away out of all the cities of Judah the high places and the sun-images. And the kingdom was quiet before him.
Chr. And he built fortified cities in Judah. For the land was quiet,  he had no war in those years, because Jehovah had given him rest.
Chr. For he said to Judah, Let us build these cities,  make about them walls,  towers, gates,  bars. The land is yet before us, because we have sought Jehovah our God. We have sought him,  he has given us rest on every side. So they built and prospered.
Chr. And Asa had an army that bore bucklers and spears, out of Judah three hundred thousand,  out of Benjamin, that bore shields and drew bows, two hundred and eighty thousand. All these were mighty men of valor.
Chr. And there came out against them Zerah the Ethiopian with an army of a million,  three hundred chariots. And he came to Mareshah.
Chr. Then Asa went out to meet him,  they set the battle in array in the valley of Zephathah at Mareshah.
Chr. And Asa cried to Jehovah his God,  said, Jehovah, there is none besides thee to help, between the mighty and him who has no strength. Help us, O Jehovah our God. For we rely on thee,  in thy name we come against this multitude. O Jehovah, thou are our God. Let not man prevail against thee.
Chr. So Jehovah smote the Ethiopians before Asa,  before Judah. And the Ethiopians fled.
Chr. And Asa and the people who were with him pursued them to Gerar. And there fell of the Ethiopians so many that they could not recover themselves. For they were destroyed before Jehovah,  before his army. And they carried away very much booty.
Chr. And they smote all the cities round about Gerar. For the fear of Jehovah came upon them. And they despoiled all the cities. For there was much spoil in them.
Chr. They also smote the tents of cattle,  carried away sheep in abundance,  camels,  returned to Jerusalem.
Chr. And the Spirit of God came upon Azariah the son of Oded.
Chr. And he went out to meet Asa,  said to him, Hear ye me, Asa,  all Judah and Benjamin. Jehovah is with you while ye are with him. And if ye seek him, he will be found of you,  if ye forsake him, he will forsake you.
Chr. Now for a long time Israel was without the true God,  without a teaching priest,  without law.
Chr. But when in their distress they turned to Jehovah, the God of Israel,  sought him, he was found by them.
Chr. And in those times there was no peace to him who went out, nor to him who came in,  great vexations were upon all the inhabitants of the lands.
Chr. And they were broken in pieces, nation against nation,  city against city. For God vexed them with all adversity.
Chr. But be ye strong,  let not your hands be slack. For your work shall be rewarded.
Chr. And when Asa heard these words,  the prophecy of Oded the prophet, he took courage,  put away the abominations out of all the land of Judah and Benjamin,  out of the cities which he had taken from the hill-country of Ephraim. And he renewed the altar of Jehovah, that was before the porch of Jehovah.
Chr. And he gathered all Judah and Benjamin,  those who sojourned with them out of Ephraim and Manasseh,  out of Simeon, for they came to him out of Israel in abundance when they saw that Jehovah his God was with him.
Chr. So they gathered themselves together at Jerusalem in the third month, in the fifteenth year of the reign of Asa.
Chr. And they sacrificed to Jehovah in that day of the spoil which they had brought, seven hundred oxen and seven thousand sheep.
Chr. And they entered into the covenant to seek Jehovah, the God of their fathers, with all their heart and with all their soul.
Chr. And that whoever would not seek Jehovah, the God of Israel, should be put to death, whether small or great, whether man or woman.
Chr. And they swore to Jehovah with a loud voice,  with shouting,  with trumpets,  with cornets.
Chr. And all Judah rejoiced at the oath. For they had sworn with all their heart,  sought him with their whole desire,  he was found by them. And Jehovah gave them rest round about.
Chr. And also he removed Maacah, the mother of Asa the king, from being queen, because she had made an abominable image for an Asherah. And Asa cut down her image,  made dust of it,  burnt it at the brook Kidron.
Chr. But the high places were not taken away out of Israel. Nevertheless the heart of Asa was perfect all his days.
Chr. And he brought into the house of God the things that his father had dedicated,  that he himself had dedicated, silver,  gold,  vessels.
Chr. And there was no more war to the thirty-fifth year of the reign of Asa.
Chr. In the thirty-sixth year of the reign of Asa, Baasha king of Israel went up against Judah,  built Ramah, that he might not allow anyone to go out or come in to Asa king of Judah.
Chr. Then Asa brought out silver and gold out of the treasures of the house of Jehovah and of the king's house,  sent to Ben-hadad king of Syria, who dwelt at Damascus, saying,
Chr. There is a league between me and thee, as between my father and thy father. Behold, I have sent thee silver and gold. Go, break thy league with Baasha king of Israel that he may depart from me.
Chr. And Ben-hadad hearkened to king Asa,  sent the captains of his armies against the cities of Israel. And they smote Ijon,  Dan,  Abel-maim,  all the store-cities of Naphtali.
Chr. And it came to pass, when Baasha heard of it, that he left off building Ramah,  let his work cease.
Chr. Then Asa the king took all Judah,  they carried away the stones of Ramah,  the timber of it, with which Baasha had built. And he built Geba and Mizpah with it.
Chr. And at that time Hanani the seer came to Asa king of Judah,  said to him, Because thou have relied on the king of Syria,  have not relied on Jehovah thy God, therefore the army of the king of Syria has escaped out of thy hand.
Chr. Were not the Ethiopians and the Lubim a huge army, with chariots and horsemen exceedingly many? Yet, because thou relied on Jehovah, he delivered them into thy hand.
Chr. For the eyes of Jehovah run to and fro throughout the whole earth, to show himself strong on behalf of those whose heart is perfect toward him. In this thou have done foolishly, for from henceforth thou shall have wars.
Chr. Then Asa was angry with the seer,  put him in the prison-house. For he was in a rage with him because of this thing. And Asa oppressed some of the people at the same time.
Chr. And, behold, the acts of Asa, first and last, lo, they are written in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel.
Chr. And in the thirty-ninth year of his reign Asa was diseased in his feet. His disease was exceedingly great, yet in his disease he did not seek for Jehovah,  to the physicians.
Chr. And Asa slept with his fathers,  died in the forty-first year of his reign.
Chr. And they buried him in his own sepulchers, which he had hewn out for himself in the city of David,  laid him in the bed which was filled with sweet odors and various kinds of spices prepared by the perfumers' art. And they made a very great burning for him.
Chr. And Jehoshaphat his son reigned in his stead,  strengthened himself against Israel.
Chr. And he placed forces in all the fortified cities of Judah,  set garrisons in the land of Judah,  in the cities of Ephraim, which Asa his father had taken.
Chr. And Jehovah was with Jehoshaphat, because he walked in the former ways of his father David,  did not seek for the Baalim,
Chr. but sought for the God of his father,  walked in his commandments,  not after the doings of Israel.
Chr. Therefore Jehovah established the kingdom in his hand. And all Judah brought to Jehoshaphat tribute,  he had riches and honor in abundance.
Chr. And his heart was lifted up in the ways of Jehovah. And furthermore he took away the high places and the Asherim out of Judah.
Chr. Also in the third year of his reign he sent his rulers, even Ben-hail,  Obadiah,  Zechariah,  Nethanel,  Micaiah, to teach in the cities of Judah;
Chr. and with them the Levites, even Shemaiah,  Nethaniah,  Zebadiah,  Asahel,  Shemiramoth,  Jehonathan,  Adonijah,  Tobijah,  Tob-adonijah, the Levites; and with them Elishama and Jehoram, the priests.
Chr. And they taught in Judah, having the book of the law of Jehovah with them. And they went about throughout all the cities of Judah,  taught among the people.
Chr. And the fear of Jehovah fell upon all the kingdoms of the lands that were round about Judah, so that they made no war against Jehoshaphat.
Chr. And some of the Philistines brought Jehoshaphat presents,  silver for tribute. The Arabians also brought him flocks, seven thousand and seven hundred rams,  seven thousand and seven hundred he-goats.
Chr. And Jehoshaphat grew exceedingly great. And he built in Judah castles and cities of storage.
Chr. And he had many works in the cities of Judah,  men of war, mighty men of valor, in Jerusalem.
Chr. And this was the numbering of them according to their fathers' houses. Of Judah, the captains of thousands: Adnah the captain,  with him three hundred thousand mighty men of valor;
Chr. and next to him Jehohanan the captain,  with him two hundred and eighty thousand;
Chr. and next to him Amasiah the son of Zichri, who willingly offered himself to Jehovah,  with him two hundred thousand mighty men of valor.
Chr. And of Benjamin: Eliada a mighty man of valor,  with him two hundred thousand armed with bow and shield;
Chr. and next to him Jehozabad,  with him a hundred and eighty thousand ready prepared for war.
Chr. These were those who waited on the king, besides those whom the king put in the fortified cities throughout all Judah.
Chr. Now Jehoshaphat had riches and honor in abundance. And he joined affinity with Ahab.
Chr. And after certain years he went down to Ahab to Samaria. And Ahab killed sheep and oxen for him in abundance,  for the people who were with him,  moved him to go up with him to Ramoth-gilead.
Chr. And Ahab king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat king of Judah, Will thou go with me to Ramoth-gilead? And he answered him, I am as thou are,  my people as thy people,  will be with thee in the war.
Chr. And Jehoshaphat said to the king of Israel, Inquire first, I pray thee, for the word of Jehovah.
Chr. Then the king of Israel gathered the prophets together, four hundred men,  said to them, Shall we go to Ramoth-gilead to battle, or shall I forbear? And they said, Go up. For God will deliver it into the hand of the king.
Chr. But Jehoshaphat said, Is there not here a prophet of Jehovah besides, that we may inquire of him?
Chr. And the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, There is yet one man by whom we may inquire of Jehovah,  I hate him. For he never prophesies good concerning me,  always evil; the same is Micaiah the son of Imla. And Jehoshaphat said, Let not the king say so.
Chr. Then the king of Israel called an officer,  said, Fetch quickly Micaiah the son of Imla.
Chr. Now the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah each sat on his throne, arrayed in their robes. And they were sitting in an open place at the entrance of the gate of Samaria,  all the prophets were prophesying before them.
Chr. And Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah made for him horns of iron,  said, Thus says Jehovah, With these thou shall push the Syrians until they be consumed.
Chr. And all the prophets prophesied so, saying, Go up to Ramoth-gilead,  prosper. For Jehovah will deliver it into the hand of the king.
Chr. And the messenger who went to call Micaiah spoke to him, saying, Behold, the words of the prophets are good to the king with one mouth. Let thy word therefore, I pray thee, be like one of theirs,  speak thou good.
Chr. And Micaiah said, As Jehovah lives, what my God says, that will I speak.
Chr. And when he came to the king, the king said to him, Micaiah, shall we go to Ramoth-gilead to battle, or shall I forbear? And he said, Go ye up,  prosper,  they shall be delivered into your hand.
Chr. And the king said to him, How many times shall I adjure thee that thou speak to me nothing but the truth in the name of Jehovah?
Chr. And he said, I saw all Israel scattered upon the mountains, as sheep that have no shepherd. And Jehovah said, These have no master. Let them return every man to his house in peace.
Chr. And the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, Did I not tell thee that he would not prophesy good concerning me,  evil?
Chr. And Micaiah said, Therefore hear ye the word of Jehovah. I saw Jehovah sitting upon his throne,  all the host of heaven standing at his right hand and at his left.
Chr. And Jehovah said, Who shall entice Ahab king of Israel, that he may go up and fall at Ramoth-gilead? And one spoke saying after this manner,  another saying after that manner.
Chr. And there came forth a spirit,  stood before Jehovah,  said, I will entice him. And Jehovah said to him, With what?
Chr. And he said, I will go forth,  will be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his prophets. And he said, Thou shall entice him,  shall also prevail. Go forth,  do so.
Chr. Now therefore, behold, Jehovah has put a lying spirit in the mouth of these thy prophets. And Jehovah has spoken evil concerning thee.
Chr. Then Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah came near,  smote Micaiah upon the cheek,  said, Which way did the Spirit of Jehovah go from me to speak to thee?
Chr. And Micaiah said, Behold, thou shall see on that day when thou shall go into an inner chamber to hide thyself.
Chr. And the king of Israel said, Take ye Micaiah,  carry him back to Amon the governor of the city,  to Joash the king's son,
Chr. and say, Thus says the king, Put this fellow in the prison,  feed him with bread of affliction and with water of affliction, until I return in peace.
Chr. And Micaiah said, If thou return at all in peace, Jehovah has not spoken by me. And he said, Hear, ye peoples, all of you.
Chr. So the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah went up to Ramoth-gilead.
Chr. And the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, I will disguise myself,  go into the battle,  put thou on thy robes. So the king of Israel disguised himself,  they went into the battle.
Chr. Now the king of Syria had commanded the captains of his chariots, saying, Fight neither with small nor great, except only with the king of Israel.
Chr. And it came to pass, when the captains of the chariots saw Jehoshaphat, that they said, It is the king of Israel. Therefore they turned around to fight against him. But Jehoshaphat cried out. And Jehovah helped him,  God moved them from him.
Chr. And it came to pass, when the captains of the chariots saw that it was not the king of Israel, that they turned back from pursuing him.
Chr. And a certain man drew his bow at a venture,  smote the king of Israel between the joints of the armor. Therefore he said to the driver of the chariot, Turn thy hand,  carry me out of the army. For I am severely wounded.
Chr. And the battle increased that day. However the king of Israel propped himself up in his chariot against the Syrians until the evening. And about the time of the going down of the sun he died.
Chr. And Jehoshaphat the king of Judah returned to his house in peace to Jerusalem.
Chr. And Jehu the son of Hanani the seer went out to meet him,  said to king Jehoshaphat, Should thou help the wicked,  love those who hate Jehovah? For this thing wrath is upon thee from before Jehovah.
Chr. Nevertheless there are good things found in thee, in that thou have put away the Asheroth out of the land,  have set thy heart to seek God.
Chr. And Jehoshaphat dwelt at Jerusalem. And he went out again among the people from Beersheba to the hill-country of Ephraim,  brought them back to Jehovah, the God of their fathers.
Chr. And he set judges in the land throughout all the fortified cities of Judah, city by city,
Chr. and said to the judges, Consider what ye do. For ye judge not for man,  for Jehovah,  he is with you in the judgment.
Chr. Now therefore let the fear of Jehovah be upon you. Take heed and do it. For there is no iniquity with Jehovah our God, nor respect of persons, nor taking of bribes.
Chr. Moreover in Jerusalem Jehoshaphat set from the Levites and the priests,  from the heads of the fathers of Israel for the judgment of Jehovah,  for controversies. And they returned to Jerusalem.
Chr. And he charged them, saying, Thus ye shall do in the fear of Jehovah, faithfully,  with a perfect heart.
Chr. And whenever any controversy shall come to you from your brothers who dwell in their cities, between blood and blood, between law and commandment, statutes and ordinances, ye shall warn them, that they not be guilty towards Jehovah,  so wrath come upon you and upon your brothers. Do this,  ye shall not be guilty.
Chr. And, behold, Amariah the chief priest is over you in all matters of Jehovah,  Zebadiah the son of Ishmael, the ruler of the house of Judah, in all the king's matters. The Levites shall also be officers before you. Deal courageously,  Jehovah be with the good.
Chr. And it came to pass after this, that the sons of Moab,  the sons of Ammon,  with them some of the Minaeans, came against Jehoshaphat to battle.
Chr. Then there came some who told Jehoshaphat, saying, There comes a great multitude against thee from beyond the sea from Syria. And, behold, they are in Hazazon-tamar (the same is En-gedi).
Chr. And Jehoshaphat was afraid,  set himself to seek for Jehovah. And he proclaimed a fast throughout all Judah.
Chr. And Judah gathered themselves together, to seek help from Jehovah, even out of all the cities of Judah they came to seek Jehovah.
Chr. And Jehoshaphat stood in the assembly of Judah and Jerusalem in the house of Jehovah before the new court.
Chr. And he said, O Jehovah, the God of our fathers, are thou not God in heaven? And are thou not ruler over all the kingdoms of the nations? And in thy hand is power and might, so that none is able to withstand thee.
Chr. Did thou not, O our God, drive out the inhabitants of this land before thy people Israel,  give it to the seed of Abraham thy friend forever?
Chr. And they dwelt therein,  have built for thee a sanctuary in it for thy name, saying,
Chr. If evil comes upon us, the sword, judgment, or pestilence, or famine, we will stand before this house,  before thee, (for thy name is in this house,) and cry out to thee in our affliction,  thou will hear and save.
Chr. And now, behold, the sons of Ammon and Moab and mount Seir (whom thou would not let Israel invade when they came out of the land of Egypt,  they turned aside from them,  did not destroy them),
Chr. behold, how they reward us, to come to cast us out of thy possession, which thou have given us to inherit.
Chr. O our God, will thou not judge them? For we have no might against this great company that comes against us. Neither do we know what to do,  our eyes are upon thee.
Chr. And all Judah stood before Jehovah, with their little ones, their wives,  their sons.
Chr. Then upon Jahaziel the son of Zechariah, the son of Benaiah, the son of Jeiel, the son of Mattaniah, the Levite, of the sons of Asaph, came the Spirit of Jehovah in the midst of the assembly.
Chr. And he said, Hearken ye, all Judah,  ye inhabitants of Jerusalem,  thou king Jehoshaphat. Thus says Jehovah to you, Fear ye not, neither be dismayed because of this great multitude. For the battle is not yours,  God's.
Chr. Tomorrow go ye down against them. Behold, they come up by the ascent of Ziz. And ye shall find them at the end of the valley, before the wilderness of Jeruel.
Chr. Ye shall not need to fight in this battle. Set yourselves, stand ye still,  see the salvation of Jehovah with you, O Judah and Jerusalem. Fear not, nor be dismayed. Tomorrow go out against them, for Jehovah is with you.
Chr. And Jehoshaphat bowed his head with his face to the ground. And all Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem fell down before Jehovah, worshiping Jehovah.
Chr. And the Levites, of the sons of the Kohathites and of the sons of the Korahites, stood up to praise Jehovah, the God of Israel, with an exceedingly loud voice.
Chr. And they rose early in the morning,  went forth into the wilderness of Tekoa. And as they went forth, Jehoshaphat stood and said, Hear me, O Judah,  ye inhabitants of Jerusalem. Believe in Jehovah your God, so shall ye be established. Believe his prophets, so shall ye prosper.
Chr. And when he had taken counsel with the people, he appointed those who should sing to Jehovah,  give praise in holy array, as they went out before the army,  say, Give thanks to Jehovah. For his loving kindness is forever.
Chr. And when they began to sing and to praise, Jehovah set an ambushment against the sons of Ammon, Moab,  mount Seir who came against Judah,  they were smitten.
Chr. For the sons of Ammon and Moab stood up against the inhabitants of mount Seir, to slay and destroy them utterly. And when they had made an end of the inhabitants of Seir, every one helped to destroy another of themselves.
Chr. And when Judah came to the watch-tower of the wilderness, they looked upon the multitude. And, behold, they were dead bodies fallen to the earth,  there were none who escaped.
Chr. And when Jehoshaphat and his people came to take the spoil of them, they found among them in abundance both riches and dead bodies,  precious jewels, which they stripped off for themselves, more than they could carry away. And they were three days in taking the spoil, it was so much.
Chr. And on the fourth day they assembled themselves in the valley of Beracah, for there they blessed Jehovah. Therefore the name of that place was called The valley of Beracah to this day.
Chr. Then they returned, every man of Judah and Jerusalem,  Jehoshaphat in the forefront of them, to go again to Jerusalem with joy. For Jehovah had made them to rejoice over their enemies.
Chr. And they came to Jerusalem with psalteries and harps and trumpets to the house of Jehovah.
Chr. And the fear of God was on all the kingdoms of the countries, when they heard that Jehovah fought against the enemies of Israel.
Chr. So the realm of Jehoshaphat was quiet. For his God gave him rest round about.
Chr. And Jehoshaphat reigned over Judah. He was thirty-five years old when he began to reign. And he reigned twenty-five years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Azubah the daughter of Shilhi.
Chr. And he walked in the way of Asa his father,  did not turn aside from it, doing that which was right in the eyes of Jehovah.
Chr. However the high places were not taken away. Neither as yet had the people set their hearts to the God of their fathers.
Chr. Now the rest of the acts of Jehoshaphat, first and last, behold, they are written in the history of Jehu the son of Hanani, which is inserted in the book of the kings of Israel.
Chr. And after this Jehoshaphat king of Judah joined himself with Ahaziah king of Israel. The same did very wickedly.
Chr. And he joined himself with him to make ships to go to Tarshish. And they made the ships in Ezion-geber.
Chr. Then Eliezer the son of Dodavahu of Mareshah prophesied against Jehoshaphat, saying, Because thou have joined thyself with Ahaziah, Jehovah has destroyed thy works. And the ships were broken, so that they were not able to go to Tarshish.
Chr. And Jehoshaphat slept with his fathers,  was buried with his fathers in the city of David. And Jehoram his son reigned in his stead.
Chr. And he had brothers, the sons of Jehoshaphat: Azariah,  Jehiel,  Zechariah,  Azariah,  Michael,  Shephatiah. All these were the sons of Jehoshaphat king of Israel.
Chr. And their father gave them great gifts, of silver,  of gold,  of precious things, with fortified cities in Judah. But the kingdom he gave to Jehoram, because he was the firstborn.
Chr. Now when Jehoram was risen up over the kingdom of his father,  had strengthened himself, he killed all his brothers with the sword,  also various of the rulers of Israel.
Chr. Jehoram was thirty-two years old when he began to reign,  he reigned eight years in Jerusalem.
Chr. And he walked in the way of the kings of Israel, as did the house of Ahab, for he had the daughter of Ahab to wife. And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah.
Chr. However Jehovah would not destroy the house of David, because of the covenant that he had made with David,  as he promised to give a lamp to him and to his sons always.
Chr. In his days Edom revolted from under the hand of Judah,  made a king over themselves.
Chr. Then Jehoram passed over with his captains,  all his chariots with him. And he rose up by night,  smote the Edomites that encompassed him around,  the captains of the chariots.
Chr. So Edom revolted from under the hand of Judah to this day. Then Libnah revolted at the same time from under his hand because he had forsaken Jehovah, the God of his fathers.
Chr. Moreover he made high places in the mountains of Judah,  made the inhabitants of Jerusalem to play the harlot,  led Judah astray.
Chr. And there came a writing to him from Elijah the prophet, saying, Thus says Jehovah, the God of David thy father, Because thou have not walked in the ways of Jehoshaphat thy father, nor in the ways of Asa king of Judah,
Chr. but have walked in the way of the kings of Israel,  have made Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem to play the harlot, like the house of Ahab did,  also have slain thy brothers of thy father's house who were better than thyself,
Chr. behold, Jehovah will smite thy people with a great plague,  thy sons,  thy wives,  all thy substance.
Chr. And thou shall have great sickness by disease of thy bowels until thy bowels fall out by reason of the sickness, day by day.
Chr. And Jehovah stirred up against Jehoram the spirit of the Philistines,  of the Arabians who are beside the Ethiopians.
Chr. And they came up against Judah,  broke into it,  carried away all the substance that was found in the king's house,  his sons also,  his wives, so that there has not been left a son to him, except Jehoahaz, the youngest of his sons.
Chr. And after all this Jehovah smote him in his bowels with an incurable disease.
Chr. And it came to pass, in process of time, at the end of two years, that his bowels fell out because of his sickness,  he died of severe diseases. And his people made no burning for him like the burning of his fathers.
Chr. He was thirty-two years old when he began to reign,  he reigned in Jerusalem eight years. And he departed without being wanted. And they buried him in the city of David,  not in the sepulchers of the kings.
Chr. And the inhabitants of Jerusalem made Ahaziah his youngest son king in his stead, for the band of men who came with the Arabians to the camp had slain all the eldest. So Ahaziah the son of Jehoram king of Judah reigned.
Chr. Ahaziah was twenty-two years old when he began to reign,  he reigned one year in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Athaliah the daughter of Omri.
Chr. He also walked in the ways of the house of Ahab. For his mother was his counselor to do wickedly.
Chr. And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah, as did the house of Ahab. For they were his counselors after the death of his father, to his destruction.
Chr. He walked also after their counsel,  went with Jehoram the son of Ahab king of Israel to war against Hazael king of Syria at Ramoth-gilead. And the Syrians wounded Joram.
Chr. And he returned to be healed in Jezreel of the wounds which they had given him at Ramah when he fought against Hazael king of Syria. And Azariah the son of Jehoram king of Judah went down to see Jehoram the son of Ahab in Jezreel because he was sick.
Chr. Now the destruction of Ahaziah was of God, in that he went to Joram, for when he came he went out with Jehoram against Jehu the son of Nimshi, whom Jehovah had anointed to cut off the house of Ahab.
Chr. And it came to pass, when Jehu was executing judgment upon the house of Ahab, that he found the rulers of Judah,  the sons of the brothers of Ahaziah, ministering to Ahaziah,  killed them.
Chr. And he sought Ahaziah,  they caught him (now he was hiding in Samaria). And they brought him to Jehu,  killed him. And they buried him, for they said, He is the son of Jehoshaphat, who sought Jehovah with all his heart. And the house of Ahaziah had no power to hold the kingdom.
Chr. Now when Athaliah the mother of Ahaziah saw that her son was dead, she arose and destroyed all the royal seed of the house of Judah.
Chr. But Jehoshabeath, the daughter of the king, took Joash the son of Ahaziah,  stole him away from among the king's sons who were slain,  put him and his nurse in the bedchamber. So Jehoshabeath, the daughter of king Jehoram, the wife of Jehoiada the priest (for she was the sister of Ahaziah), hid him from Athaliah, so that she did not kill him.
Chr. And he was with them hid in the house of God six years,  Athaliah reigned over the land.
Chr. And in the seventh year Jehoiada strengthened himself,  took the captains of hundreds, Azariah the son of Jeroham,  Ishmael the son of Jehohanan,  Azariah the son of Obed,  Maaseiah the son of Adaiah,  Elishaphat the son of Zichri, into covenant with him.
Chr. And they went about in Judah,  gathered the Levites out of all the cities of Judah,  the heads of fathers of Israel,  they came to Jerusalem.
Chr. And all the assembly made a covenant with the king in the house of God. And he said to them, Behold, the king's son shall reign, as Jehovah has spoken concerning the sons of David.
Chr. This is the thing that ye shall do: A third part of you who come in on the sabbath, of the priests and of the Levites, shall be porters of the thresholds,
Chr. and a third part shall be at the king's house,  a third part at the gate of the foundation. And all the people shall be in the courts of the house of Jehovah.
Chr. But let none come into the house of Jehovah except the priests,  those who minister of the Levites. They shall come in for they are holy,  all the people shall keep the charge of Jehovah.
Chr. And the Levites shall encompass the king round about, every man with his weapons in his hand. And whoever comes into the house, let him be slain. And be ye with the king when he comes in,  when he goes out.
Chr. So the Levites and all Judah did according to all that Jehoiada the priest commanded. And they took every man his men, those who were to come in on the sabbath, with those who were to go out on the sabbath. For Jehoiada the priest did not dismiss the divisions.
Chr. And Jehoiada the priest delivered to the captains of hundreds the spears,  bucklers,  shields, that had been king David's, which were in the house of God.
Chr. And he set all the people, every man with his weapon in his hand, from the right side of the house to the left side of the house, along by the altar and the house, by the king round about.
Chr. Then they brought out the king's son,  put the crown upon him,  gave him the testimony,  made him king. And Jehoiada and his sons anointed him. And they said, Live, O king.
Chr. And when Athaliah heard the noise of the people running and praising the king, she came to the people into the house of Jehovah.
Chr. And she looked, , behold, the king stood by his pillar at the entrance,  the captains and the trumpets by the king. And all the people of the land rejoiced,  blew trumpets. The singers also played on instruments of music,  led the singing of praise. Then Athaliah tore her clothes,  said, Treason! treason!
Chr. And Jehoiada the priest brought out the captains of hundreds who were set over the army,  said to them, Have her forth between the ranks. And whoever follows her, let him be slain with the sword, for the priest said, Do not slay her in the house of Jehovah.
Chr. So they made way for her. And she went to the entrance of the horse gate to the king's house,  they killed her there.
Chr. And Jehoiada made a covenant between himself,  all the people,  the king, that they should be Jehovah's people.
Chr. And all the people went to the house of Baal,  broke it down,  broke his altars and his images in pieces,  killed Mattan the priest of Baal before the altars.
Chr. And Jehoiada appointed the officers of the house of Jehovah under the hand of the priests the Levites, whom David had distributed in the house of Jehovah, to offer the burnt offerings of Jehovah, as it is written in the law of Moses, with rejoicing and with singing, according to the order of David.
Chr. And he set the porters at the gates of the house of Jehovah that no man who was unclean in anything should enter in.
Chr. And he took the captains of hundreds,  the mighty men,  the governors of the people,  all the people of the land,  brought down the king from the house of Jehovah. And they came through the upper gate to the king's house,  set the king upon the throne of the kingdom.
Chr. So all the people of the land rejoiced,  the city was quiet. And they had slain Athaliah with the sword.
Chr. Joash was seven years old when he began to reign,  he reigned forty years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Zibiah, of Beersheba.
Chr. And Joash did that which was right in the eyes of Jehovah all the days of Jehoiada the priest.
Chr. And Jehoiada took two wives for him,  he begot sons and daughters.
Chr. And it came to pass after this, that Joash was minded to restore the house of Jehovah.
Chr. And he gathered together the priests and the Levites,  said to them, Go out to the cities of Judah,  gather money from all Israel to repair the house of your God from year to year. And see that ye hasten the matter. However the Levites did not hasten it.
Chr. And the king called for Jehoiada the chief,  said to him, Why have thou not required of the Levites to bring in out of Judah and out of Jerusalem the tax of Moses the servant of Jehovah,  of the assembly of Israel, for the tent of the testimony?
Chr. For the sons of Athaliah, that wicked woman, had broken up the house of God,  also all the dedicated things of the house of Jehovah they bestowed upon the Baalim.
Chr. So the king commanded,  they made a chest,  set it outside at the gate of the house of Jehovah.
Chr. And they made a proclamation through Judah and Jerusalem, to bring in for Jehovah the tax that Moses the servant of God laid upon Israel in the wilderness.
Chr. And all the rulers and all the people rejoiced,  brought in,  cast into the chest, until they had made an end.
Chr. And it was so, that, at what ever time the chest was brought to the king's officers by the hand of the Levites,  when they saw that there was much money, the king's scribe and the chief priest's officer came and emptied the chest,  took it,  carried it to its place again. Thus they did day by day,  gathered money in abundance.
Chr. And the king and Jehoiada gave it to such as did the work of the service of the house of Jehovah. And they hired masons and carpenters to restore the house of Jehovah,  also such as wrought iron and brass to repair the house of Jehovah.
Chr. So the workmen labored,  the work of repairing went forward in their hands,  they set up the house of God in its state,  strengthened it.
Chr. And when they had made an end, they brought the rest of the money before the king and Jehoiada, from which were made vessels for the house of Jehovah, even vessels with which to minister and to offer,  spoons,  vessels of gold and silver. And they offered burnt offerings in the house of Jehovah continually all the days of Jehoiada.
Chr. But Jehoiada grew old and was full of days,  he died. He was a hundred and thirty years old when he died.
Chr. And they buried him in the city of David among the kings, because he had done good in Israel,  toward God and his house.
Chr. Now after the death of Jehoiada the rulers of Judah came,  made obeisance to the king. Then the king hearkened to them.
Chr. And they forsook the house of Jehovah, the God of their fathers,  served the Asherim and the idols. And wrath came upon Judah and Jerusalem for this their guiltiness.
Chr. Yet he sent prophets to them to bring them again to Jehovah. And they testified against them,  they would not give ear.
Chr. And the Spirit of God came upon Zechariah the son of Jehoiada the priest. And he stood above the people,  said to them, Thus says God, Why do ye transgress the commandments of Jehovah, so that ye cannot prosper? Because ye have forsaken Jehovah, he has also forsaken you.
Chr. And they conspired against him,  stoned him with stones at the commandment of the king in the court of the house of Jehovah.
Chr. Thus Joash the king did not remember the kindness which Jehoiada his father had done to him,  killed his son. And when he died, he said, Jehovah look upon it,  require it.
Chr. And it came to pass at the end of the year, that the army of the Syrians came up against him. And they came to Judah and Jerusalem,  destroyed all the rulers of the people from among the people,  sent all the spoil of them to the king of Damascus.
Chr. For the army of the Syrians came with a small company of men. And Jehovah delivered a very great host into their hand because they had forsaken Jehovah, the God of their fathers. So they executed judgment upon Joash.
Chr. And when they were departed from him (for they left him very sick), his own servants conspired against him for the blood of the sons of Jehoiada the priest,  killed him on his bed,  he died. And they buried him in the city of David,  they did not bury him in the sepulchers of the kings.
Chr. And these are those who conspired against him: Zabad the son of Shimeath the Ammonitess,  Jehozabad the son of Shimrith the Moabitess.
Chr. Now concerning his sons,  the greatness of the burdens laid upon him,  the rebuilding of the house of God, behold, they are written in the commentary of the book of the kings. And Amaziah his son reigned in his stead.
Chr. Amaziah was twenty-five years old when he began to reign,  he reigned twenty-nine years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Jehoaddan, of Jerusalem.
Chr. And he did that which was right in the eyes of Jehovah,  not with a perfect heart.
Chr. Now it came to pass, when the kingdom was established to him, that he killed his servants who had killed the king his father.
Chr. But he did not put their sons to death,  did according to that which is written in the law in the book of Moses, as Jehovah commanded, saying, The fathers shall not die for the sons, neither shall the sons die for the fathers,  every man shall die for his own sin.
Chr. Moreover Amaziah gathered Judah together,  appointed them according to their fathers' houses, for heads of thousands and heads of hundreds, even all Judah and Benjamin. And he numbered them from twenty years old and upward,  found them three hundred thousand chosen men, able to go forth to war, who could handle spear and shield.
Chr. He also hired a hundred thousand mighty men of valor out of Israel for a hundred talents of silver.
Chr. But there came a man of God to him, saying, O king, let not the army of Israel go with thee. For Jehovah is not with Israel, namely, with all the sons of Ephraim.
Chr. But if thou are going, do it. Be strong for the battle, because God will cast thee down before the enemy, for God has power to help,  to cast down.
Chr. And Amaziah said to the man of God, But what shall we do for the hundred talents which I have given to the army of Israel? And the man of God answered, Jehovah is able to give thee much more than this.
Chr. Then Amaziah separated them, namely, the army that came to him out of Ephraim, to go home again. Therefore their anger was greatly kindled against Judah,  they returned home in fierce anger.
Chr. And Amaziah took courage,  led forth his people,  went to the Valley of Salt,  smote ten thousand of the sons of Seir.
Chr. And the sons of Judah carried away ten thousand alive,  brought them to the top of the rock,  cast them down from the top of the rock, so that they all were broken in pieces.
Chr. But the men of the army whom Amaziah sent back, that they should not go with him to battle, fell upon the cities of Judah, from Samaria even to Beth-horon,  smote three thousand of them,  took much spoil.
Chr. Now it came to pass, after Amaziah came from the slaughter of the Edomites, that he brought the gods of the sons of Seir,  set them up to be his gods,  bowed down himself before them,  burned incense to them.
Chr. Therefore the anger of Jehovah was kindled against Amaziah. And he sent a prophet to him, who said to him, Why have thou sought after the gods of the people, which have not delivered their own people out of thy hand?
Chr. And it came to pass, as he talked with him, that the king said to him, Have we made thee of the king's counsel? Cease. Why should thou be smitten? Then the prophet ceased,  said, I know that God has determined to destroy thee, because thou have done this,  have not hearkened to my counsel.
Chr. Then Amaziah king of Judah took advice,  sent to Joash, the son of Jehoahaz the son of Jehu, king of Israel, saying, Come, let us look each other in the face.
Chr. And Joash king of Israel sent to Amaziah king of Judah, saying, The thistle that was in Lebanon sent to the cedar that was in Lebanon, saying, Give thy daughter to my son to wife. And there passed by a wild beast that was in Lebanon,  trampled down the thistle.
Chr. Thou say, Lo, I have smitten Edom. And thy heart lifts thee up to boast. Remain now at home. Why should thou meddle to thy hurt, that thou should fall, even thou,  Judah with thee?
Chr. But Amaziah would not hear, for it was of God, that he might deliver them into the hand of their enemies, because they had sought after the gods of Edom.
Chr. So Joash king of Israel went up. And he and Amaziah king of Judah looked each other in the face at Beth-shemesh, which belongs to Judah.
Chr. And Judah was put to the worse before Israel,  they fled every man to his tent.
Chr. And Joash king of Israel took Amaziah king of Judah, the son of Joash the son of Jehoahaz, at Beth-shemesh,  brought him to Jerusalem,  broke down the wall of Jerusalem from the gate of Ephraim to the corner gate, four hundred cubits.
Chr. And he took all the gold and silver,  all the vessels that were found in the house of God with Obed-edom,  the treasures of the king's house, also the hostages,  returned to Samaria.
Chr. And Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah lived fifteen years after the death of Joash son of Jehoahaz king of Israel.
Chr. Now the rest of the acts of Amaziah, first and last, behold, are they not written in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel?
Chr. Now from the time that Amaziah turned away from following Jehovah they made a conspiracy against him in Jerusalem,  he fled to Lachish. But they sent after him to Lachish,  killed him there.
Chr. And they brought him upon horses,  buried him with his fathers in the city of Judah.
Chr. And all the people of Judah took Uzziah, who was sixteen years old,  made him king in the place of his father Amaziah.
Chr. He built Eloth,  restored it to Judah, after that the king slept with his fathers.
Chr. Uzziah was sixteen years old when he began to reign,  he reigned fifty-two years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Jechiliah, of Jerusalem.
Chr. And he did that which was right in the eyes of Jehovah, according to all that his father Amaziah had done.
Chr. And he set himself to seek God in the days of Zechariah, who had understanding in the vision of God. And as long as he sought Jehovah, God made him to prosper.
Chr. And he went forth and warred against the Philistines,  broke down the wall of Gath,  the wall of Jabneh,  the wall of Ashdod. And he built cities in the country of Ashdod,  among the Philistines.
Chr. And God helped him against the Philistines,  against the Arabians who dwelt in Gur-baal,  the Meunim.
Chr. And the Ammonites gave tribute to Uzziah. And his name spread abroad even to the entrance of Egypt, for he grew exceedingly strong.
Chr. Moreover Uzziah built towers in Jerusalem at the corner gate,  at the valley gate,  at the turning of the wall,  fortified them.
Chr. And he built towers in the wilderness,  hewed out many cisterns, for he had much cattle, also in the lowland and in the plain. And he had husbandmen and vinedressers in the mountains and in the fruitful fields, for he loved husbandry.
Chr. Moreover Uzziah had an army of fighting men who went out to war by bands, according to the number of their reckoning made by Jeiel the scribe and Maaseiah the officer, under the hand of Hananiah, one of the king's captains.
Chr. The whole number of the heads of fathers, even the mighty men of valor, was two thousand and six hundred.
Chr. And under their hand was an army, three hundred seven thousand and five hundred, that made war with mighty power, to help the king against the enemy.
Chr. And Uzziah prepared for them, even for all the army, shields,  spears,  helmets,  coats of mail,  bows,  stones for slinging.
Chr. And he made engines in Jerusalem, invented by skilful men, to be on the towers and upon the battlements, with which to shoot arrows and great stones. And his name spread far abroad. For he was marvelously helped, till he was strong.
Chr. But when he was strong, his heart was lifted up, so that he did corruptly,  he trespassed against Jehovah his God. For he went into the temple of Jehovah to burn incense upon the altar of incense.
Chr. And Azariah the priest went in after him,  with him eighty priests of Jehovah, who were valiant men.
Chr. And they withstood Uzziah the king,  said to him, It does not pertain to thee, Uzziah, to burn incense to Jehovah,  to the priests the sons of Aaron who are consecrated to burn incense. Go out of the sanctuary. For thou have trespassed, neither shall it be for thine honor from Jehovah God.
Chr. Then Uzziah was angry. And he had a censer in his hand to burn incense. And while he was angry with the priests, the leprosy broke forth in his forehead before the priests in the house of Jehovah, beside the altar of incense.
Chr. And Azariah the chief priest,  all the priests, looked upon him, , behold, he was leprous in his forehead. And they thrust him out quickly from there. Yea, he himself also hastened to go out, because Jehovah had smitten him.
Chr. And Uzziah the king was a leper to the day of his death,  dwelt in a separate house, being a leper. For he was cut off from the house of Jehovah,  Jotham his son was over the king's house, judging the people of the land.
Chr. Now the rest of the acts of Uzziah, first and last, Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz, wrote.
Chr. So Uzziah slept with his fathers,  they buried him with his fathers in the field of burial which belonged to the kings. For they said, He is a leper. And Jotham his son reigned in his stead.
Chr. Jotham was twenty-five years old when he began to reign,  he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Jerushah the daughter of Zadok.
Chr. And he did that which was right in the eyes of Jehovah, according to all that his father Uzziah had done. However he did not enter into the temple of Jehovah. And the people still did corruptly.
Chr. He built the upper gate of the house of Jehovah,  on the wall of Ophel he built much.
Chr. Moreover he built cities in the hill-country of Judah,  in the forests he built castles and towers.
Chr. Also he fought with the king of the sons of Ammon,  prevailed against them. And the sons of Ammon gave him the same year a hundred talents of silver,  ten thousand measures of wheat,  ten thousand of barley. So much did the sons of Ammon render to him, in the second year also,  in the third.
Chr. So Jotham became mighty, because he ordered his ways before Jehovah his God.
Chr. Now the rest of the acts of Jotham,  all his wars,  his ways, behold, they are written in the book of the kings of Israel and Judah.
Chr. He was twenty-five years old when he began to reign,  reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem.
Chr. And Jotham slept with his fathers,  they buried him in the city of David. And Ahaz his son reigned in his stead.
Chr. Ahaz was twenty years old when he began to reign,  he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem. And he did not do that which was right in the eyes of Jehovah like David his father,
Chr. but he walked in the ways of the kings of Israel,  also made molten images for the Baalim.
Chr. Moreover he burnt incense in the valley of the son of Hinnom,  burnt his sons in the fire, according to the abominations of the nations whom Jehovah cast out before the sons of Israel.
Chr. And he sacrificed and burnt incense in the high places,  on the hills,  under every green tree.
Chr. Therefore Jehovah his God delivered him into the hand of the king of Syria. And they smote him,  carried away of his a great multitude of captives,  brought them to Damascus. And he was also delivered into the hand of the king of Israel, who smote him with a great slaughter.
Chr. For Pekah the son of Remaliah killed in Judah a hundred and twenty thousand in one day, all of them valiant men, because they had forsaken Jehovah, the God of their fathers.
Chr. And Zichri, a mighty man of Ephraim, killed Maaseiah the king's son,  Azrikam the ruler of the house,  Elkanah who was next to the king.
Chr. And the sons of Israel carried away captive of their brothers two hundred thousand, women, sons,  daughters,  also took away much spoil from them,  brought the spoil to Samaria.
Chr. But a prophet of Jehovah was there, whose name was Oded. And he went out to meet the army that came to Samaria,  said to them, Behold, because Jehovah, the God of your fathers, was angry with Judah, he has delivered them into your hand. And ye have slain them in a rage which has reached up to heaven.
Chr. And now ye propose to keep under the sons of Judah and Jerusalem for bondmen and bondwomen to you. Are there not even with you trespasses of your own against Jehovah your God?
Chr. Now hear me therefore,  send back the captives that ye have taken captive of your brothers. For the fierce wrath of Jehovah is upon you.
Chr. Then certain of the heads of the sons of Ephraim, Azariah the son of Johanan, Berechiah the son of Meshillemoth,  Jehizkiah the son of Shallum,  Amasa the son of Hadlai, stood up against those who came from the war,
Chr. and said to them, Ye shall not bring in the captives here. For ye propose that which will bring upon us a trespass against Jehovah, to add to our sins and to our trespass. For our trespass is great,  there is fierce wrath against Israel.
Chr. So the armed men left the captives and the spoil before the rulers and all the assembly.
Chr. And the men who have been mentioned by name rose up,  took the captives,  with the spoil clothed all who were naked among them,  dressed them,  shod them,  gave them to eat and to drink,  anointed them,  carried all the feeble of them upon donkeys,  brought them to Jericho, the city of palm trees, to their brothers. Then they returned to Samaria.
Chr. At that time king Ahaz sent to the kings of Assyria to help him.
Chr. For again the Edomites had come and smitten Judah,  carried away captives.
Chr. The Philistines also had invaded the cities of the lowland,  of the South of Judah,  had taken Beth-shemesh,  Aijalon,  Gederoth,  Soco with the towns of it,  Timnah with the towns of it, also Gimzo and the towns of it. And they dwelt there.
Chr. For Jehovah brought Judah low because of Ahaz king of Israel, for he had dealt wantonly in Judah,  trespassed severely against Jehovah.
Chr. And Tilgath-pilneser king of Assyria came to him,  distressed him,  did not strengthen him.
Chr. For Ahaz took away a portion out of the house of Jehovah,  out of the house of the king and of the rulers,  gave it to the king of Assyria,  it did not help him.
Chr. And in the time of his distress he trespassed yet more against Jehovah, this same king Ahaz.
Chr. For he sacrificed to the gods of Damascus, which smote him. And he said, Because the gods of the kings of Syria helped them, therefore I will sacrifice to them, that they may help me. But they were the ruin of him,  of all Israel.
Chr. And Ahaz gathered together the vessels of the house of God,  cut in pieces the vessels of the house of God,  shut up the doors of the house of Jehovah. And he made altars for him in every corner of Jerusalem.
Chr. And in every city of Judah he made high places to burn incense to other gods,  provoked to anger Jehovah, the God of his fathers.
Chr. Now the rest of his acts,  all his ways, first and last, behold, they are written in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel.
Chr. And Ahaz slept with his fathers,  they buried him in the city, even in Jerusalem. For they did not bring him into the sepulchers of the kings of Israel. And Hezekiah his son reigned in his stead.
Chr. Hezekiah began to reign when he was twenty-five years old,  he reigned twenty-nine years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Abijah, the daughter of Zechariah.
Chr. And he did that which was right in the eyes of Jehovah, according to all that David his father had done.
Chr. In the first year of his reign, in the first month, he opened the doors of the house of Jehovah,  repaired them.
Chr. And he brought in the priests and the Levites,  gathered them together into the broad place on the east,
Chr. and said to them, Hear me, ye Levites. Now sanctify yourselves,  sanctify the house of Jehovah, the God of your fathers,  carry forth the filthiness out of the holy place.
Chr. For our fathers have trespassed,  done that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah our God,  have forsaken him,  have turned away their faces from the habitation of Jehovah,  turned their backs.
Chr. Also they have shut up the doors of the porch,  put out the lamps,  have not burned incense nor offered burnt offerings in the holy place to the God of Israel.
Chr. Therefore the wrath of Jehovah was upon Judah and Jerusalem,  he has delivered them to be tossed to and fro, to be an astonishment,  a hissing, as ye see with your eyes.
Chr. For, lo, our fathers have fallen by the sword,  our sons and our daughters and our wives are in captivity for this.
Chr. Now it is in my heart to make a covenant with Jehovah, the God of Israel, that his fierce anger may turn away from us.
Chr. My sons, be not now negligent. For Jehovah has chosen you to stand before him, to minister to him,  that ye should be his ministers,  burn incense.
Chr. Then the Levites arose: Mahath, the son of Amasai,  Joel the son of Azariah, of the sons of the Kohathites,  of the sons of Merari, Kish the son of Abdi,  Azariah the son of Jehallelel,  of the Gershonites, Joah the son of Zimmah,  Eden the son of Joah;
Chr. and of the sons of Elizaphan, Shimri and Jeuel,  of the sons of Asaph, Zechariah and Mattaniah,
Chr. and of the sons of Heman, Jehuel and Shimei,  of the sons of Jeduthun, Shemaiah and Uzziel.
Chr. And they gathered their brothers,  sanctified themselves,  went in, according to the commandment of the king by the words of Jehovah, to cleanse the house of Jehovah.
Chr. And the priests went in to the inner part of the house of Jehovah to cleanse it,  brought out all the uncleanness that they found in the temple of Jehovah into the court of the house of Jehovah. And the Levites took it, to carry it out abroad to the brook Kidron.
Chr. Now they began on the first day of the first month to sanctify,  on the eighth day of the month they came to the porch of Jehovah. And they sanctified the house of Jehovah in eight days,  on the sixteenth day of the first month they made an end.
Chr. Then they went in to Hezekiah the king within the palace,  said, We have cleansed all the house of Jehovah,  the altar of burnt offering with all the vessels of it,  the table of showbread with all the vessels of it.
Chr. Moreover all the vessels, which king Ahaz in his reign cast away when he trespassed, we have prepared and sanctified. And, behold, they are before the altar of Jehovah.
Chr. Then Hezekiah the king arose early,  gathered the rulers of the city,  went up to the house of Jehovah.
Chr. And they brought seven bullocks,  seven rams,  seven lambs,  seven he-goats, for a sin offering for the kingdom and for the sanctuary and for Judah. And he commanded the priests the sons of Aaron to offer them on the altar of Jehovah.
Chr. So they killed the bullocks. And the priests received the blood,  sprinkled it on the altar. And they killed the rams,  sprinkled the blood upon the altar. They also killed the lambs,  sprinkled the blood upon the altar.
Chr. And they brought near the he-goats for the sin offering before the king and the assembly. And they laid their hands upon them,
Chr. and the priests killed them. And they made a sin offering with their blood upon the altar, to make atonement for all Israel. For the king commanded that the burnt offering and the sin offering should be made for all Israel.
Chr. And he set the Levites in the house of Jehovah with cymbals, with psalteries,  with harps, according to the commandment of David,  of Gad the king's seer,  Nathan the prophet. For the commandment was of Jehovah by his prophets.
Chr. And the Levites stood with the instruments of David,  the priests with the trumpets.
Chr. And Hezekiah commanded to offer the burnt offering upon the altar. And when the burnt offering began, the song of Jehovah began also,  the trumpets, together with the instruments of David king of Israel.
Chr. And all the assembly worshiped,  the singers sang,  the trumpeters sounded. All this until the burnt offering was finished.
Chr. And when they had made an end of offering, the king and all who were present with him bowed themselves and worshiped.
Chr. Moreover Hezekiah the king and the rulers commanded the Levites to sing praises to Jehovah with the words of David,  of Asaph the seer. And they sang praises with gladness,  they bowed their heads and worshiped.
Chr. Then Hezekiah answered and said, Now ye have consecrated yourselves to Jehovah. Come near and bring sacrifices and thank offerings into the house of Jehovah. And the assembly brought in sacrifices and thank offerings; and as many as were of a willing heart brought burnt offerings.
Chr. And the number of the burnt offerings which the assembly brought was seventy bullocks, a hundred rams,  two hundred lambs. All these were for a burnt offering to Jehovah.
Chr. And the consecrated things were six hundred oxen and three thousand sheep.
Chr. But the priests were too few, so that they could not skin all the burnt offerings. Therefore their brothers the Levites helped them till the work was ended,  until the priests had sanctified themselves. For the Levites were more upright in heart to sanctify themselves than the priests.
Chr. And also the burnt offerings were in abundance, with the fat of the peace offerings,  with the drink offerings for every burnt offering. So the service of the house of Jehovah was set in order.
Chr. And Hezekiah rejoiced,  all the people, because of that which God had prepared for the people; for the thing was done suddenly.
Chr. And Hezekiah sent to all Israel and Judah,  wrote letters also to Ephraim and Manasseh, that they should come to the house of Jehovah at Jerusalem, to keep the Passover to Jehovah, the God of Israel.
Chr. For the king had taken counsel,  his rulers,  all the assembly in Jerusalem, to keep the Passover in the second month.
Chr. For they could not keep it at that time, because the priests had not sanctified themselves in sufficient number, neither had the people gathered themselves together to Jerusalem.
Chr. And the thing was right in the eyes of the king and of all the assembly.
Chr. So they established a decree to make proclamation throughout all Israel, from Beersheba even to Dan, that they should come to keep the Passover to Jehovah, the God of Israel, at Jerusalem. For they had not kept it in great numbers in such sort as it is written.
Chr. So the posts went with the letters from the king and his rulers throughout all Israel and Judah,  according to the commandment of the king, saying, Ye sons of Israel, turn again to Jehovah, the God of Abraham, Isaac,  Israel, that he may return to the remnant of you who escaped out of the hand of the kings of Assyria.
Chr. And be ye not like your fathers,  like your brothers, who trespassed against Jehovah, the God of their fathers, so that he gave them up to desolation, as ye see.
Chr. Now be ye not stiff-necked, as your fathers were,  yield yourselves to Jehovah,  enter into his sanctuary, which he has sanctified forever,  serve Jehovah your God, that his fierce anger may turn away from you.
Chr. For if ye turn again to Jehovah, your brothers and your sons shall find compassion before those who led them captive,  shall come again into this land. For Jehovah your God is gracious and merciful,  will not turn away his face from you, if ye return to him.
Chr. So the posts passed from city to city through the country of Ephraim and Manasseh, even to Zebulun. But they laughed them to scorn,  mocked them.
Chr. Nevertheless certain men of Asher and Manasseh and of Zebulun humbled themselves,  came to Jerusalem.
Chr. Also the hand of God came upon Judah to give them one heart, to do the commandment of the king and of the rulers by the word of Jehovah.
Chr. And many people assembled at Jerusalem to keep the feast of unleavened bread in the second month, a very great assembly.
Chr. And they arose and took away the altars that were in Jerusalem,  all the altars for incense they took away,  cast them into the brook Kidron.
Chr. Then they killed the Passover on the fourteenth day of the second month. And the priests and the Levites were ashamed,  sanctified themselves,  brought burnt offerings into the house of Jehovah.
Chr. And they stood in their place after their order, according to the law of Moses the man of God; the priests sprinkled the blood which they received from the hand of the Levites.
Chr. For there were many in the assembly who had not sanctified themselves. Therefore the Levites had charge of killing the Passovers for everyone who was not clean, to sanctify them to Jehovah.
Chr. For a multitude of the people, even many of Ephraim and Manasseh, Issachar and Zebulun, had not cleansed themselves, yet they ate the Passover otherwise than it is written. For Hezekiah had prayed for them, saying, The good Jehovah pardon everyone
Chr. who sets his heart to seek God, Jehovah, the God of his fathers, though he be not according to the purification of the sanctuary.
Chr. And Jehovah hearkened to Hezekiah,  healed the people.
Chr. And the sons of Israel who were present at Jerusalem kept the feast of unleavened bread seven days with great gladness. And the Levites and the priests praised Jehovah day by day, with loud instruments to Jehovah.
Chr. And Hezekiah spoke encouragingly to all the Levites who had good understanding in the service of Jehovah. So they ate throughout the feast for the seven days, offering sacrifices of peace offerings,  making confession to Jehovah, the God of their fathers.
Chr. And the whole assembly took counsel to keep another seven days. And they kept those seven days with gladness.
Chr. For Hezekiah king of Judah gave to the assembly for offerings a thousand bullocks and seven thousand sheep. And the rulers gave to the assembly a thousand bullocks and ten thousand sheep. And a great number of priests sanctified themselves.
Chr. And all the assembly of Judah, with the priests and the Levites,  all the assembly that came out of Israel,  the sojourners who came out of the land of Israel,  who dwelt in Judah, rejoiced.
Chr. So there was great joy in Jerusalem. For since the time of Solomon the son of David king of Israel there was not the like in Jerusalem.
Chr. Then the priests the Levites arose and blessed the people. And their voice was heard,  their prayer came up to his holy habitation, even to heaven.
Chr. Now when all this was finished, all Israel that were present went out to the cities of Judah,  broke in pieces the pillars,  hewed down the Asherim,  broke down the high places and the altars out of all Judah and Benjamin, also in Ephraim and Manasseh, until they had destroyed them all. Then all the sons of Israel returned, every man to his possession, into their own cities.
Chr. And Hezekiah appointed the divisions of the priests and the Levites after their divisions, every man according to his service, both the priests and the Levites, for burnt offerings and for peace offerings, to minister,  to give thanks,  to praise in the gates of the camp of Jehovah.
Chr. Also he appointed the king's portion of his substance for the burnt offerings, namely, for the morning and evening burnt offerings,  the burnt offerings for the sabbaths,  for the new moons,  for the set feasts, as it is written in the law of Jehovah.
Chr. Moreover he commanded the people who dwelt in Jerusalem to give the portion of the priests and the Levites, that they might give themselves to the law of Jehovah.
Chr. And as soon as the commandment came abroad, the sons of Israel gave in abundance the first-fruits of grain, new wine,  oil,  honey,  of all the increase of the field. And they brought in the tithe of all things abundantly.
Chr. And the sons of Israel and Judah, who dwelt in the cities of Judah, they also brought in the tithe of oxen and sheep,  the tithe of dedicated things which were consecrated to Jehovah their God,  laid them by heaps.
Chr. In the third month they began to lay the foundation of the heaps,  finished them in the seventh month.
Chr. And when Hezekiah and the rulers came and saw the heaps, they blessed Jehovah,  his people Israel.
Chr. Then Hezekiah questioned the priests and the Levites concerning the heaps.
Chr. And Azariah the chief priest, of the house of Zadok, answered him and said, Since they began to bring the oblations into the house of Jehovah, we have eaten and had enough,  have plenty left. For Jehovah has blessed his people,  that which is left is this great store.
Chr. Then Hezekiah commanded to prepare chambers in the house of Jehovah,  they prepared them.
Chr. And they brought in the oblations and the tithes and the dedicated things faithfully. And Conaniah the Levite was ruler over them,  Shimei his brother was second.
Chr. And Jehiel,  Azaziah,  Nahath,  Asahel,  Jerimoth,  Jozabad,  Eliel,  Ismachiah,  Mahath,  Benaiah, were overseers under the hand of Conaniah and Shimei his brother, by the appointment of Hezekiah the king,  Azariah the ruler of the house of God.
Chr. And Kore the son of Imnah the Levite, the porter at the east gate, was over the freewill offerings of God, to distribute the oblations of Jehovah,  the most holy things.
Chr. And under him were Eden,  Miniamin,  Jeshua,  Shemaiah, Amariah,  Shecaniah, in the cities of the priests, in their office of trust, to give to their brothers by divisions, as well to the great as to the small,
Chr. besides those who were reckoned by genealogy of males, from three years old and upward, even everyone that entered into the house of Jehovah, as the duty of every day required, for their service in their offices according to their divisions,
Chr. and those who were reckoned by genealogy of the priests by their fathers' houses,  the Levites from twenty years old and upward, in their offices by their divisions,
Chr. and those who were reckoned by genealogy of all their little ones, their wives,  their sons,  their daughters, through all the congregation. For in their office of trust they sanctified themselves in holiness.
Chr. Also for the sons of Aaron the priests, who were in the fields of the suburbs of their cities, in every city, there were men who were mentioned by name, to give portions to all the males among the priests,  to all who were reckoned by genealogy among the Levites.
Chr. And thus Hezekiah did throughout all Judah. And he wrought that which was good and right and faithful before Jehovah his God.
Chr. And in every work that he began in the service of the house of God,  in the law,  in the commandments, to seek his God, he did it with all his heart,  prospered.
Chr. After these things,  this faithfulness, Sennacherib king of Assyria came,  entered into Judah,  encamped against the fortified cities,  thought to win them for himself.
Chr. And when Hezekiah saw that Sennacherib came,  that he intended to fight against Jerusalem,
Chr. he took counsel with his rulers and his mighty men to stop the waters of the fountains which were outside the city. And they helped him.
Chr. So there was gathered together many people. And they stopped all the fountains,  the brook that flowed through the midst of the land, saying, Why should the kings of Assyria come,  find much water?
Chr. And he took courage,  built up all the wall that was broken down,  raised it up to the towers,  the other wall outside,  strengthened Millo in the city of David,  made weapons and shields in abundance.
Chr. And he set captains of war over the people,  gathered them together to him in the broad place at the gate of the city,  spoke encouragingly to them, saying,
Chr. Be strong and of good courage, be not afraid nor dismayed of the king of Assyria, nor of all the multitude that is with him. For there is a greater with us than with him.
Chr. With him is an arm of flesh,  with us is Jehovah our God to help us,  to fight our battles. And the people rested themselves upon the words of Hezekiah king of Judah.
Chr. After this Sennacherib king of Assyria sent his servants to Jerusalem (now he was before Lachish,  all his power with him) to Hezekiah king of Judah,  to all Judah that were at Jerusalem, saying,
Chr. Thus says Sennacherib king of Assyria, On what do ye trust that ye remain in the siege in Jerusalem?
Chr. Does not Hezekiah persuade you, to give you over to die by famine and by thirst, saying, Jehovah our God will deliver us out of the hand of the king of Assyria?
Chr. Has not the same Hezekiah taken away his high places and his altars,  commanded Judah and Jerusalem, saying, Ye shall worship before one altar,  upon it ye shall burn incense?
Chr. Know ye not what I and my fathers have done to all the peoples of the lands? Were the gods of the nations of the lands in any way able to deliver their land out of my hand?
Chr. Who was there among all the gods of those nations, which my fathers utterly destroyed, that could deliver his people out of my hand that your God should be able to deliver you out of my hand?
Chr. Now therefore let not Hezekiah deceive you, nor persuade you after this manner, neither believe ye him. For no god of any nation or kingdom was able to deliver his people out of my hand,  out of the hand of my fathers. How much less shall your God deliver you out of my hand?
Chr. And his servants spoke yet more against Jehovah God,  against his servant Hezekiah.
Chr. He also wrote letters, to rail on Jehovah, the God of Israel,  to speak against him, saying, As the gods of the nations of the lands, which have not delivered their people out of my hand, so shall the God of Hezekiah not deliver his people out of my hand.
Chr. And they cried with a loud voice in the Jews' language to the people of Jerusalem who were on the wall, to frighten them,  to trouble them, that they might take the city.
Chr. And they spoke of the God of Jerusalem, as of the gods of the peoples of the earth, which are the work of men's hands.
Chr. And Hezekiah the king,  Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz, prayed because of this,  cried out to heaven.
Chr. And Jehovah sent an agent who cut off all the mighty men of valor,  the leaders and captains, in the camp of the king of Assyria. So he returned with shame of face to his own land. And when he came into the house of his god, those who came forth from his own bowels killed him there with the sword.
Chr. Thus Jehovah saved Hezekiah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem from the hand of Sennacherib the king of Assyria,  from the hand of all others,  guided them on every side.
Chr. And many brought gifts to Jehovah to Jerusalem,  precious things to Hezekiah king of Judah. So that he was exalted in the sight of all nations from thenceforth.
Chr. In those days Hezekiah was sick even to death,  he prayed to Jehovah. And he spoke to him,  gave him a sign.
Chr. But Hezekiah did not render again according to the benefit done to him. For his heart was lifted up. Therefore there was wrath upon him,  upon Judah and Jerusalem.
Chr. Notwithstanding Hezekiah humbled himself for the pride of his heart, both he and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so that the wrath of Jehovah did not come upon them in the days of Hezekiah.
Chr. And Hezekiah had exceedingly much riches and honor. And he provided for him treasuries for silver,  for gold,  for precious stones,  for spices,  for shields,  for all manner of goodly vessels,
Chr. also store-houses for the increase of grain and new wine and oil,  stalls for all manner of beasts,  flocks in folds.
Chr. Moreover he provided for him cities,  possessions of flocks and herds in abundance. For God had given him very much substance.
Chr. This same Hezekiah also stopped the upper spring of the waters of Gihon,  brought them straight down on the west side of the city of David. And Hezekiah prospered in all his works.
Chr. However in the business of the ambassadors of the rulers of Babylon, who sent to him to inquire of the wonder that was done in the land, God left him, to try him, that he might know all that was in his heart.
Chr. Now the rest of the acts of Hezekiah,  his good deeds, behold, they are written in the vision of Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz, in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel.
Chr. And Hezekiah slept with his fathers,  they buried him in the ascent of the sepulchers of the sons of David. And all Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem honored him at his death. And Manasseh his son reigned in his stead.
Chr. Manasseh was twelve years old when he began to reign,  he reigned fifty-five years in Jerusalem.
Chr. And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah after the abominations of the nations whom Jehovah cast out before the sons of Israel.
Chr. For he built again the high places which Hezekiah his father had broken down. And he reared up altars for the Baalim,  made Asheroth,  worshiped all the host of heaven,  served them.
Chr. And he built altars in the house of Jehovah, of which Jehovah said, In Jerusalem shall my name be forever.
Chr. And he built altars for all the host of heaven in the two courts of the house of Jehovah.
Chr. He also made his sons to pass through the fire in the valley of the son of Hinnom. And he practiced augury,  used enchantments,  practiced sorcery,  dealt with psychics,  with wizards. He wrought much evil in the sight of Jehovah, to provoke him to anger.
Chr. And he set the graven image of the idol which he had made, in the house of God, of which God said to David and to Solomon his son, In this house,  in Jerusalem, which I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel, I will put my name forever,
Chr. neither will I any more remove the foot of Israel from off the land which I have appointed for your fathers, if only they will observe to do all that I have commanded them, even all the law and the statutes and the ordinances given by Moses.
Chr. And Manasseh seduced Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so that they did evil more than the nations did whom Jehovah destroyed before the sons of Israel.
Chr. And Jehovah spoke to Manasseh,  to his people,  they gave no heed.
Chr. Therefore Jehovah brought upon them the captains of the army of the king of Assyria, who took Manasseh in chains,  bound him with fetters,  carried him to Babylon.
Chr. And when he was in distress, he besought Jehovah his God,  humbled himself greatly before the God of his fathers.
Chr. And he prayed to him. And he was entreated of him,  heard his supplication,  brought him again to Jerusalem into his kingdom. Then Manasseh knew that Jehovah he was God.
Chr. Now after this he built an outer wall to the city of David, on the west side of Gihon, in the valley, even to the entrance at the fish gate. And he encompassed Ophel around with it,  raised it up to a very great height. And he put valiant captains in all the fortified cities of Judah.
Chr. And he took away the foreign gods,  the idol out of the house of Jehovah,  all the altars that he had built in the mount of the house of Jehovah,  in Jerusalem,  cast them out of the city.
Chr. And he built up the altar of Jehovah,  offered on it sacrifices of peace offerings and of thanksgiving,  commanded Judah to serve Jehovah, the God of Israel.
Chr. Nevertheless the people still sacrificed in the high places,  only to Jehovah their God.
Chr. Now the rest of the acts of Manasseh,  his prayer to his God,  the words of the seers who spoke to him in the name of Jehovah, the God of Israel, behold, they are written among the acts of the kings of Israel.
Chr. Also his prayer,  how God was entreated by him,  all his sin and his trespass,  the places in which he built high places,  set up the Asherim and the graven images, before he humbled himself, behold, they are written in the history of Hozai.
Chr. So Manasseh slept with his fathers,  they buried him in his own house. And Amon his son reigned in his stead.
Chr. Amon was twenty-two years old when he began to reign,  he reigned two years in Jerusalem.
Chr. And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah, as did Manasseh his father. And Amon sacrificed to all the graven images which Manasseh his father had made,  served them.
Chr. And he did not humble himself before Jehovah, as Manasseh his father had humbled himself,  this same Amon trespassed more and more.
Chr. And his servants conspired against him,  put him to death in his own house.
Chr. But the people of the land killed all those who had conspired against king Amon. And the people of the land made Josiah his son king in his stead.
Chr. Josiah was eight years old when he began to reign,  he reigned thirty-one years in Jerusalem.
Chr. And he did that which was right in the eyes of Jehovah,  walked in the ways of David his father,  turned not aside to the right hand or to the left.
Chr. For in the eighth year of his reign, while he was yet young, he began to seek after the God of David his father. And in the twelfth year he began to purge Judah and Jerusalem from the high places,  the Asherim,  the graven images,  the molten images.
Chr. And they broke down the altars of the Baalim in his presence,  the sun-images that were on high above them he hewed down,  the Asherim,  the graven images,  the molten images, he broke in pieces,  made dust of them,  strewed it upon the graves of those who had sacrificed to them.
Chr. And he burnt the bones of the priests upon their altars,  purged Judah and Jerusalem.
Chr. And so also in the cities of Manasseh and Ephraim and Simeon, even to Naphtali, in their ruins round about.
Chr. And he broke down the altars,  beat the Asherim and the graven images into powder,  hewed down all the sun-images throughout all the land of Israel,  returned to Jerusalem.
Chr. Now in the eighteenth year of his reign, when he had purged the land and the house, he sent Shaphan the son of Azaliah,  Maaseiah the governor of the city,  Joah the son of Joahaz the recorder, to repair the house of Jehovah his God.
Chr. And they came to Hilkiah the high priest,  delivered the money that was brought into the house of God, which the Levites, the keepers of the threshold, had gathered by the hand of Manasseh and Ephraim,  by all the remnant of Israel,  by all Judah and Benjamin,  by the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
Chr. And they delivered it into the hand of the workmen who had the oversight of the house of Jehovah. And the workmen who labored in the house of Jehovah gave it to mend and repair the house.
Chr. Even to the carpenters and to the builders they gave it, to buy hewn stone,  timber for couplings,  to make beams for the houses which the kings of Judah had destroyed.
Chr. And the men did the work faithfully. And the overseers of them were Jahath and Obadiah, the Levites, of the sons of Merari,  Zechariah and Meshullam, of the sons of the Kohathites, to set it forward,  others of the Levites, all who were skilful with instruments of music.
Chr. Also they were over the bearers of burdens,  set forward all who did the work in every manner of service. And of the Levites there were scribes,  officers,  porters.
Chr. And when they brought out the money that was brought into the house of Jehovah, Hilkiah the priest found the book of the law of Jehovah given by Moses.
Chr. And Hilkiah answered and said to Shaphan the scribe, I have found the book of the law in the house of Jehovah. And Hilkiah delivered the book to Shaphan.
Chr. And Shaphan carried the book to the king,  moreover brought back word to the king, saying, All that was committed to thy servants, they are doing.
Chr. And they have emptied out the money that was found in the house of Jehovah,  have delivered it into the hand of the overseers,  into the hand of the workmen.
Chr. And Shaphan the scribe told the king, saying, Hilkiah the priest has delivered a book to me. And Shaphan read therein before the king.
Chr. And it came to pass, when the king had heard the words of the law, that he tore his clothes.
Chr. And the king commanded Hilkiah,  Ahikam the son of Shaphan,  Abdon the son of Micah,  Shaphan the scribe,  Asaiah the king's servant, saying,
Chr. Go ye, inquire of Jehovah for me,  for those who are left in Israel and in Judah, concerning the words of the book that is found. For great is the wrath of Jehovah that is poured out upon us, because our fathers have not kept the word of Jehovah, to do according to all that is written in this book.
Chr. So Hilkiah,  those whom the king had commanded, went to Huldah the prophetess, the wife of Shallum the son of Tokhath, the son of Hasrah, keeper of the wardrobe (now she dwelt in Jerusalem in the second quarter),  they spoke to her to that effect.
Chr. And she said to them, Thus says Jehovah, the God of Israel: Tell ye the man who sent you to me,
Chr. Thus says Jehovah, Behold, I will bring evil upon this place,  upon the inhabitants of it, even all the curses that are written in the book which they have read before the king of Judah.
Chr. Because they have forsaken me,  have burned incense to other gods, that they might provoke me to anger with all the works of their hands. Therefore my wrath is poured out upon this place,  it shall not be quenched.
Chr. But to the king of Judah, who sent you to inquire of Jehovah, thus ye shall say to him, Thus says Jehovah, the God of Israel: As concerning the words which thou have heard,
Chr. because thy heart was tender,  thou humbled thyself before God when thou heard his words against this place,  against the inhabitants of it,  have humbled thyself before me,  have torn thy clothes,  wept before me, I also have heard thee, says Jehovah.
Chr. Behold, I will gather thee to thy fathers,  thou shall be gathered to thy grave in peace, neither shall thine eyes see all the evil that I will bring upon this place,  upon the inhabitants of it. And they brought back word to the king.
Chr. Then the king sent and gathered together all the elders of Judah and Jerusalem.
Chr. And the king went up to the house of Jehovah,  all the men of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem,  the priests,  the Levites,  all the people, both great and small. And he read in their ears all the words of the book of the covenant that was found in the house of Jehovah.
Chr. And the king stood in his place,  made a covenant before Jehovah, to walk after Jehovah,  to keep his commandments,  his testimonies,  his statutes, with all his heart,  with all his soul, to perform the words of the covenant that were written in this book.
Chr. And he caused all who were found in Jerusalem and Benjamin to stand to it. And the inhabitants of Jerusalem did according to the covenant of God, the God of their fathers.
Chr. And Josiah took away all the abominations out of all the countries that pertained to the sons of Israel,  made all who were found in Israel to serve, even to serve Jehovah their God. All his days they did not depart from following Jehovah, the God of their fathers.
Chr. And Josiah kept a Passover to Jehovah in Jerusalem. And they killed the Passover on the fourteenth day of the first month.
Chr. And he set the priests in their offices,  encouraged them to the service of the house of Jehovah.
Chr. And he said to the Levites who taught all Israel, who were holy to Jehovah, Put the holy ark in the house which Solomon the son of David king of Israel built. There shall no more be a burden upon your shoulders. Now serve Jehovah your God,  his people Israel.
Chr. And prepare yourselves after your fathers' houses by your divisions, according to the writing of David king of Israel,  according to the writing of Solomon his son.
Chr. And stand in the holy place according to the divisions of the fathers' houses of your brothers the sons of the people,  the portion of a fathers' house of the Levites.
Chr. And kill the Passover,  sanctify yourselves,  prepare for your brothers, to do according to the word of Jehovah by Moses.
Chr. And Josiah gave to the sons of the people, of the flock, lambs and kids, all of them for the Passover offerings, to all who were present, to the number of thirty thousand,  also three thousand bullocks; these were of the king's substance.
Chr. And his rulers gave for a freewill offering to the people, to the priests,  to the Levites. Hilkiah and Zechariah and Jehiel, the rulers of the house of God, gave to the priests for the Passover offerings two thousand and six hundred small cattle,  three hundred oxen.
Chr. Conaniah also,  Shemaiah and Nethanel, his brothers,  Hashabiah and Jeiel and Jozabad, the chiefs of the Levites, gave to the Levites for the Passover offerings five thousand small cattle,  five hundred oxen.
Chr. So the service was prepared,  the priests stood in their place,  the Levites by their divisions, according to the king's commandment.
Chr. And they killed the Passover,  the priests sprinkled the blood by their hand,  the Levites skinned them.
Chr. And they removed the burnt offerings that they might give them according to the divisions of the fathers' houses of the sons of the people, to offer to Jehovah as it is written in the book of Moses. And so they did with the oxen.
Chr. And they roasted the Passover with fire according to the ordinance. And the holy offerings they boiled in pots,  in caldrons,  in pans,  carried them quickly to all the sons of the people.
Chr. And afterward they prepared for themselves,  for the priests, because the priests the sons of Aaron were busy in offering the burnt offerings and the fat until night. Therefore the Levites prepared for themselves,  for the priests the sons of Aaron.
Chr. And the singers the sons of Asaph were in their place according to the commandment of David,  Asaph,  Heman,  Jeduthun the king's seer. And the porters were at every gate. They did not need to depart from their service, for their brothers the Levites prepared for them.
Chr. So all the service of Jehovah was prepared the same day, to keep the Passover,  to offer burnt offerings upon the altar of Jehovah, according to the commandment of king Josiah.
Chr. And the sons of Israel who were present kept the Passover at that time,  the feast of unleavened bread seven days.
Chr. And there was no Passover like to that kept in Israel from the days of Samuel the prophet. Neither did any of the kings of Israel keep such a Passover as Josiah kept,  the priests,  the Levites,  all Judah and Israel that were present,  the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
Chr. In the eighteenth year of the reign of Josiah this Passover was kept.
Chr. After all this, when Josiah had prepared the temple, Neco king of Egypt went up to fight against Carchemish by the Euphrates,  Josiah went out against him.
Chr. But he sent ambassadors to him, saying, What have I to do with thee, thou king of Judah? I come not against thee this day,  against the house with which I have war,  God has commanded me to make haste. Cease thee from meddling with God, who is with me, that he not destroy thee.
Chr. Nevertheless Josiah would not turn his face from him,  disguised himself that he might fight with him. And he did not hearken to the words of Neco from the mouth of God,  came to fight in the valley of Megiddo.
Chr. And the archers shot at king Josiah. And the king said to his servants, Remove me, for I am severely wounded.
Chr. So his servants took him out of the chariot,  put him in the second chariot that he had,  brought him to Jerusalem. And he died,  was buried in the sepulchers of his fathers. And all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah.
Chr. And Jeremiah lamented for Josiah. And all the singing men and singing women spoke of Josiah in their lamentations to this day. And they made them an ordinance in Israel, , behold, they are written in the lamentations.
Chr. Now the rest of the acts of Josiah,  his good deeds, according to that which is written in the law of Jehovah,
Chr. and his acts, first and last, behold, they are written in the book of the kings of Israel and Judah.
Chr. Then the people of the land took Jehoahaz the son of Josiah,  made him king in his father's stead in Jerusalem.
Chr. Joahaz was twenty-three years old when he began to reign,  he reigned three months in Jerusalem.
Chr. And the king of Egypt deposed him at Jerusalem,  fined the land a hundred talents of silver and a talent of gold.
Chr. And the king of Egypt made Eliakim his brother king over Judah and Jerusalem,  changed his name to Jehoiakim. And Neco took Joahaz his brother,  carried him to Egypt.
Chr. Jehoiakim was twenty-five years old when he began to reign,  he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah his God.
Chr. Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came up against him,  bound him in fetters to carry him to Babylon.
Chr. Nebuchadnezzar also carried of the vessels of the house of Jehovah to Babylon,  put them in his temple at Babylon.
Chr. Now the rest of the acts of Jehoiakim,  his abominations which he did,  that which was found in him, behold, they are written in the book of the kings of Israel and Judah. And Jehoiachin his son reigned in his stead.
Chr. Jehoiachin was eight years old when he began to reign,  he reigned three months and ten days in Jerusalem. And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah.
Chr. And at the return of the year king Nebuchadnezzar sent,  brought him to Babylon, with the good vessels of the house of Jehovah,  made Zedekiah his brother king over Judah and Jerusalem.
Chr. Zedekiah was twenty-one years old when he began to reign,  he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem.
Chr. And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah his God. He did not humble himself before Jeremiah the prophet speaking from the mouth of Jehovah.
Chr. And he also rebelled against king Nebuchadnezzar, who had made him swear by God. But he stiffened his neck,  hardened his heart against turning to Jehovah, the God of Israel.
Chr. Moreover all the chiefs of the priests,  the people, trespassed very greatly after all the abominations of the nations. And they polluted the house of Jehovah which he had hallowed in Jerusalem.
Chr. And Jehovah, the God of their fathers, sent to them by his messengers, rising up early and sending, because he had compassion on his people,  on his dwelling-place.
Chr. But they mocked the messengers of God,  despised his words,  scoffed at his prophets, until the wrath of Jehovah arose against his people, till there was no remedy.
Chr. Therefore he brought upon them the king of the Chaldeans, who killed their young men with the sword in the house of their sanctuary,  had no compassion upon young man or virgin, old man or hoary-headed. He gave them all into his hand.
Chr. And all the vessels of the house of God, great and small,  the treasures of the house of Jehovah,  the treasures of the king,  of his rulers, all these he brought to Babylon.
Chr. And they burnt the house of God,  broke down the wall of Jerusalem,  burnt all the palaces of it with fire,  destroyed all the good vessels of it.
Chr. And those who had escaped from the sword he carried away to Babylon,  they were servants to him and his sons until the reign of the kingdom of Persia,
Chr. to fulfill the word of Jehovah by the mouth of Jeremiah, until the land had enjoyed its sabbaths; as long as it lay desolate it kept sabbath, to fulfill seventy years.
Chr. Now in the first year of Cyrus king of Persia, that the word of Jehovah by the mouth of Jeremiah might be accomplished, Jehovah stirred up the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia, so that he made a proclamation throughout all his kingdom,  put it also in writing, saying,
Chr. Thus says Cyrus king of Persia, All the kingdoms of the earth has Jehovah, the God of heaven, given me. And he has charged me to build a house for him in Jerusalem, which is in Judah. Whoever there is among you of all his people, Jehovah his God be with him,  let him go up.
Ezra
Ezra. Now in the first year of Cyrus king of Persia, that the word of Jehovah by the mouth of Jeremiah might be accomplished, Jehovah stirred up the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia, so that he made a proclamation throughout all his kingdom,  put it also in writing, saying,
Ezra. Thus says Cyrus king of Persia, All the kingdoms of the earth has Jehovah, the God of heaven, given me,  he has charged me to build him a house in Jerusalem, which is in Judah.
Ezra. Whoever there is among you of all his people, his God be with him,  let him go up to Jerusalem, which is in Judah,  build the house of Jehovah, the God of Israel (he is God), which is in Jerusalem.
Ezra. And whoever is left, in any place where he sojourns, let the men of his place help him with silver,  with gold,  with goods,  with beasts, besides the freewill offering for the house of God which is in Jerusalem.
Ezra. Then the heads of fathers of Judah and Benjamin,  the priests,  the Levites, even all whose spirit God had stirred, rose up to go up to build the house of Jehovah which is in Jerusalem.
Ezra. And all those who were round about them strengthened their hands with vessels of silver, with gold, with goods,  with beasts,  with precious things, besides all that was willingly offered.
Ezra. Also Cyrus the king brought forth the vessels of the house of Jehovah, which Nebuchadnezzar had brought forth out of Jerusalem,  had put in the house of his gods,
Ezra. even those Cyrus king of Persia brought forth by the hand of Mithredath the treasurer,  numbered them to Sheshbazzar, the ruler of Judah.
Ezra. And this is the number of them: thirty platters of gold, a thousand platters of silver, twenty-nine knives,
Ezra. thirty bowls of gold, four hundred and ten silver bowls of a second sort,  a thousand other vessels.
Ezra. All the vessels of gold and of silver were five thousand and four hundred. All these Sheshbazzar brought up when those of the captivity were brought up from Babylon to Jerusalem.
Ezra. Now these are the sons of the province who went up out of the captivity of those who had been carried away, whom Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon had carried away to Babylon,  who returned to Jerusalem and Judah, every man to his city,
Ezra. who came with Zerubbabel, Jeshua, Nehemiah, Seraiah, Reelaiah, Mordecai, Bilshan, Mispar, Bigvai, Rehum, Baanah. The number of the men of the people of Israel:
Ezra. The sons of Parosh, two thousand a hundred seventy-two.
Ezra. The sons of Shephatiah, three hundred seventy-two.
Ezra. The sons of Arah, seven hundred seventy-five.
Ezra. The sons of Pahath-moab, of the sons of Jeshua and Joab, two thousand eight hundred and twelve.
Ezra. The sons of Elam, a thousand two hundred fifty-four.
Ezra. The sons of Zattu, nine hundred forty-five.
Ezra. The sons of Zaccai, seven hundred and sixty.
Ezra. The sons of Bani, six hundred forty-two.
Ezra. The sons of Bebai, six hundred twenty-three.
Ezra. The sons of Azgad, a thousand two hundred twenty-two.
Ezra. The sons of Adonikam, six hundred sixty-six.
Ezra. The sons of Bigvai, two thousand fifty-six.
Ezra. The sons of Adin, four hundred fifty-four.
Ezra. The sons of Ater, of Hezekiah, ninety-eight.
Ezra. The sons of Bezai, three hundred twenty-three.
Ezra. The sons of Jorah, a hundred and twelve.
Ezra. The sons of Hashum, two hundred twenty-three.
Ezra. The sons of Gibbar, ninety-five.
Ezra. The sons of Bethlehem, a hundred twenty-three.
Ezra. The men of Netophah, fifty-six.
Ezra. The men of Anathoth, a hundred twenty-eight.
Ezra. The sons of Azmaveth, forty-two.
Ezra. The sons of Kiriath-arim, Chephirah,  Beeroth, seven hundred and forty-three.
Ezra. The sons of Ramah and Geba, six hundred twenty-one.
Ezra. The men of Michmas, a hundred twenty-two.
Ezra. The men of Bethel and Ai, two hundred twenty-three.
Ezra. The sons of Nebo, fifty-two.
Ezra. The sons of Magbish, a hundred fifty-six.
Ezra. The sons of the other Elam, a thousand two hundred fifty-four.
Ezra. The sons of Harim, three hundred and twenty.
Ezra. The sons of Lod, Hadid,  Ono, seven hundred twenty-five.
Ezra. The sons of Jericho, three hundred forty-five.
Ezra. The sons of Senaah, three thousand and six hundred and thirty.
Ezra. The priests: the sons of Jedaiah, of the house of Jeshua, nine hundred seventy-three.
Ezra. The sons of Immer, a thousand fifty-two.
Ezra. The sons of Pashhur, a thousand two hundred forty-seven.
Ezra. The sons of Harim, a thousand and seventeen.
Ezra. The Levites: the sons of Jeshua and Kadmiel, of the sons of Hodaviah, seventy-four.
Ezra. The singers: the sons of Asaph, a hundred twenty-eight.
Ezra. The sons of the porters: the sons of Shallum, the sons of Ater, the sons of Talmon, the sons of Akkub, the sons of Hatita, the sons of Shobai, in all a hundred thirty-nine.
Ezra. The Nethinim: the sons of Ziha, the sons of Hasupha, the sons of Tabbaoth,
Ezra. the sons of Keros, the sons of Siaha, the sons of Padon,
Ezra. the sons of Lebanah, the sons of Hagabah, the sons of Akkub,
Ezra. the sons of Hagab, the sons of Shamlai, the sons of Hanan,
Ezra. the sons of Giddel, the sons of Gahar, the sons of Reaiah,
Ezra. the sons of Rezin, the sons of Nekoda, the sons of Gazzam,
Ezra. the sons of Uzza, the sons of Paseah, the sons of Besai,
Ezra. the sons of Asnah, the sons of Meunim, the sons of Nephisim,
Ezra. the sons of Bakbuk, the sons of Hakupha, the sons of Harhur,
Ezra. the sons of Bazluth, the sons of Mehida, the sons of Harsha,
Ezra. the sons of Barkos, the sons of Sisera, the sons of Temah,
Ezra. the sons of Neziah, the sons of Hatipha.
Ezra. The sons of Solomon's servants: the sons of Sotai, the sons of Hassophereth, the sons of Peruda,
Ezra. the sons of Jaalah, the sons of Darkon, the sons of Giddel,
Ezra. the sons of Shephatiah, the sons of Hattil, the sons of Pochereth-hazzebaim, the sons of Ami.
Ezra. All the Nethinim and the sons of Solomon's servants were three hundred ninety-two.
Ezra. And these were those who went up from Tel-melah, Tel-harsha, Cherub, Addan,  Immer,  they could not show their fathers' houses,  their seed, whether they were of Israel:
Ezra. the sons of Delaiah, the sons of Tobiah, the sons of Nekoda, six hundred fifty and two.
Ezra. And of the sons of the priests: the sons of Habaiah, the sons of Hakkoz, the sons of Barzillai who took a wife of the daughters of Barzillai the Gileadite,  was called after their name.
Ezra. These sought their registration among those that were reckoned by genealogy,  they were not found. Therefore they were deemed polluted and put away from the priesthood.
Ezra. And the governor said to them that they should not eat of the most holy things till there stood up a priest with Urim and with Thummim.
Ezra. The whole assembly together was forty-two thousand three hundred and sixty,
Ezra. besides their men-servants and their maid-servants, of whom there were seven thousand three hundred thirty-seven. And they had two hundred singing men and singing women.
Ezra. Their horses were seven hundred thirty-six, their mules, two hundred forty-five,
Ezra. their camels, four hundred thirty-five, their donkeys, six thousand seven hundred and twenty.
Ezra. And some of the heads of fathers, when they came to the house of Jehovah which is in Jerusalem, offered willingly for the house of God to set it up in its place.
Ezra. They gave after their ability into the treasury of the work sixty-one thousand darics of gold,  five thousand pounds of silver,  one hundred priests' garments.
Ezra. So the priests,  the Levites,  some of the people,  the singers,  the porters,  the Nethinim, dwelt in their cities,  all Israel in their cities.
Ezra. And when the seventh month came,  the sons of Israel were in the cities, the people gathered themselves together as one man to Jerusalem.
Ezra. Then Jeshua the son of Jozadak,  his brothers the priests,  Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel,  his brothers, stood up and built the altar of the God of Israel, to offer burnt offerings on it as it is written in the law of Moses the man of God.
Ezra. And they set the altar upon its base, for fear was upon them because of the peoples of the countries. And they offered burnt offerings on it to Jehovah, even burnt offerings morning and evening.
Ezra. And they kept the feast of tabernacles as it is written,  offered the daily burnt offerings by number according to the ordinance, as the duty of every day required.
Ezra. And afterward the continual burnt offering,  the offerings of the new moons,  of all the set feasts of Jehovah that were consecrated,  of everyone who willingly offered a freewill offering to Jehovah.
Ezra. From the first day of the seventh month they began to offer burnt offerings to Jehovah. But the foundation of the temple of Jehovah was not yet laid.
Ezra. Also they gave money to the masons,  to the carpenters,  food,  drink,  oil, to those of Sidon,  to those of Tyre, to bring cedar trees from Lebanon to the sea, to Joppa, according to the grant that they had of Cyrus king of Persia.
Ezra. Now in the second year of their coming to the house of God at Jerusalem, in the second month, Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel,  Jeshua the son of Jozadak,  the rest of their brothers the priests and the Levites,  all those who came out of the captivity to Jerusalem, began. And they appointed the Levites, from twenty years old and upward, to have the oversight of the work of the house of Jehovah.
Ezra. Then Jeshua with his sons and his brothers, Kadmiel and his sons, the sons of Judah, stood together to have the oversight of the workmen in the house of God: the sons of Henadad, with their sons and their brothers the Levites.
Ezra. And when the builders laid the foundation of the temple of Jehovah, they set the priests in their apparel with trumpets,  the Levites the sons of Asaph with cymbals, to praise Jehovah, after the order of David king of Israel.
Ezra. And they sang one to another in praising and giving thanks to Jehovah, saying, For he is good, for his loving kindness is forever toward Israel. And all the people shouted with a great shout, when they praised Jehovah, because the foundation of the house of Jehovah was laid.
Ezra. But many of the priests and Levites and heads of fathers, the old men who had seen the first house, when the foundation of this house was laid before their eyes, wept with a loud voice,  many shouted aloud for joy.
Ezra. So that the people could not discern the noise of the shout of joy from the noise of the weeping of the people, for the people shouted with a loud shout,  the noise was heard afar off.
Ezra. Now when the adversaries of Judah and Benjamin heard that the sons of the captivity were building a temple to Jehovah, the God of Israel,
Ezra. then they drew near to Zerubbabel,  to the heads of fathers,  said to them, Let us build with you, for we seek your God, as ye do,  we sacrifice to him since the days of Esar-haddon king of Assyria who brought us up here.
Ezra. But Zerubbabel,  Jeshua,  the rest of the heads of fathers of Israel, said to them, Ye have nothing to do with us in building a house to our God,  we ourselves together will build to Jehovah, the God of Israel, as king Cyrus the king of Persia has commanded us.
Ezra. Then the people of the land weakened the hands of the people of Judah,  troubled them in building,
Ezra. and hired counselors against them to frustrate their purpose all the days of Cyrus king of Persia, even until the reign of Darius king of Persia.
Ezra. And in the reign of Ahasuerus, in the beginning of his reign, they wrote an accusation against the inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem.
Ezra. And in the days of Artaxerxes, Bishlam, Mithredath, Tabeel,  the rest of his companions, wrote to Artaxerxes king of Persia. And the writing of the letter was written in the Syrian character,  set forth in the Syrian tongue.
Ezra. Rehum the chancellor,  Shimshai the scribe wrote a letter against Jerusalem to Artaxerxes the king in this way.
Ezra. Then wrote Rehum the chancellor,  Shimshai the scribe,  the rest of their companions, the Dinaites,  the Apharsathchites, the Tarpelites, the Apharsites, the Archevites, the Babylonians, the Shushanchites, the Dehaites, the Elamites,
Ezra. and the rest of the nations whom the great and noble Osnappar brought over,  set in the city of Samaria,  in the rest beyond the River,  so forth.
Ezra. This is a copy of the letter that they sent to Artaxerxes the king: Thy servants the men beyond the River,  so forth.
Ezra. Be it known to the king, that the Jews who came up from thee have come to us to Jerusalem. They are building the rebellious and the evil city,  have finished the walls,  repaired the foundations.
Ezra. Be it known now to the king, that, if this city be built,  the walls finished, they will not pay tribute, custom, or toll,  in the end it will be hurtful to the kings.
Ezra. Now because we eat the salt of the palace,  it is not fitting for us to see the king's dishonor, therefore we have sent and certified to the king,
Ezra. that search may be made in the book of the records of thy fathers. So thou shall find in the book of the records,  know that this city is a rebellious city,  hurtful to kings and provinces. And that they have made sedition within the same of old time, for which cause this city was laid waste.
Ezra. We certify to the king that, if this city be built,  the walls finished, by this means thou shall have no portion beyond the River.
Ezra. Then the king sent an answer to Rehum the chancellor,  to Shimshai the scribe,  to the rest of their companions who dwell in Samaria,  in the rest beyond the River: Peace,  so forth.
Ezra. The letter which ye sent to us has been plainly read before me.
Ezra. And I decreed,  search has been made. And it is found that this city of old time has made insurrection against kings,  that rebellion and sedition have been made in it.
Ezra. There have also been mighty kings over Jerusalem who have ruled over all the country beyond the River,  tribute, custom,  toll, was paid to them.
Ezra. Make ye now a decree to cause these men to cease,  that this city not be built until a decree shall be made by me.
Ezra. And take heed that ye be not slack in this matter. Why should damage grow to the hurt of the kings?
Ezra. Then when the copy of king Artaxerxes' letter was read before Rehum,  Shimshai the scribe,  their companions, they went in haste to Jerusalem to the Jews,  made them cease by force and power.
Ezra. Then the work of the house of God which is at Jerusalem ceased,  it ceased until the second year of the reign of Darius king of Persia.
Ezra. Now the prophets, Haggai the prophet,  Zechariah the son of Iddo, prophesied to the Jews who were in Judah and Jerusalem, in the name of the God of Israel, to them.
Ezra. Then Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel,  Jeshua the son of Jozadak, rose up and began to build the house of God which is at Jerusalem,  with them were the prophets of God, helping them.
Ezra. At the same time Tattenai, the governor beyond the River,  Shethar-bozenai,  their companions, came to them,  said thus to them, Who gave you a decree to build this house,  to finish this wall?
Ezra. Then we told them after this manner, namely, what the names of the men were who were making this building.
Ezra. But the eye of their God was upon the elders of the Jews,  they did not make them cease till the matter should come to Darius,  then answer should be returned by letter concerning it.
Ezra. The copy of the letter that Tattenai, the governor beyond the River,  Shethar-bozenai,  his companions the Apharsachites, who were beyond the River, sent to Darius the king;
Ezra. they sent a letter to him, in which was written thus: To Darius the king, all peace.
Ezra. Be it known to the king, that we went into the province of Judah to the house of the great God, which is built with great stones,  timber is laid in the walls. And this work goes on with diligence and prospers in their hands.
Ezra. Then we asked those elders,  said to them thus: Who gave you a decree to build this house,  to finish this wall?
Ezra. Also, we asked them their names, to certify to thee, that we might write the names of the men who were at the head of them.
Ezra. And thus they returned us an answer, saying, We are the servants of the God of heaven and earth. And are building the house that was built these many years ago, which a great king of Israel built and finished.
Ezra. But after that our fathers had provoked the God of heaven to wrath. He gave them into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, the Chaldean, who destroyed this house,  carried the people away into Babylon.
Ezra. But in the first year of Cyrus king of Babylon, Cyrus the king made a decree to build this house of God.
Ezra. And also the gold and silver vessels of the house of God, which Nebuchadnezzar took out of the temple that was in Jerusalem,  brought into the temple of Babylon, those Cyrus the king took out of the temple of Babylon,  they were delivered to one whose name was Sheshbazzar whom he had made governor.
Ezra. And he said to him, Take these vessels. Go put them in the temple that is in Jerusalem,  let the house of God be built in its place.
Ezra. Then the same Sheshbazzar came,  laid the foundations of the house of God which is in Jerusalem. And since that time even until now it has been in building,  yet it is not completed.
Ezra. Now therefore, if it seems good to the king, let there be search made in the king's treasure-house, which is there at Babylon, whether it be so, that a decree was made from Cyrus the king to build this house of God at Jerusalem,  let the king send his pleasure to us concerning this matter.
Ezra. Then Darius the king made a decree,  search was made in the house of the archives where the treasures were laid up in Babylon.
Ezra. And there was found at Achmetha, in the palace that is in the province of Media, a roll,  in it was thus written for a record:
Ezra. In the first year of Cyrus the king, Cyrus the king made a decree: Concerning the house of God at Jerusalem, let the house be built-the place where they offer sacrifices-and let the foundations of it be strongly laid, the height of it sixty cubits,  the breadth of it sixty cubits,
Ezra. with three courses of great stones,  a course of new timber. And let the expenses be given out of the king's house.
Ezra. And also let the gold and silver vessels of the house of God, which Nebuchadnezzar took forth out of the temple which is at Jerusalem,  brought to Babylon, be restored,  brought again to the temple which is at Jerusalem, every one to its place. And thou shall put them in the house of God.
Ezra. Now therefore, Tattenai, governor beyond the River, Shethar-bozenai,  your companions the Apharsachites, who are beyond the River, be ye far from there:
Ezra. Let the work of this house of God alone. Let the governor of the Jews and the elders of the Jews build this house of God in its place.
Ezra. Moreover I make a decree what ye shall do to these elders of the Jews for the building of this house of God: That of the king's goods, even of the tribute beyond the River, expenses be given with all diligence to these men, that they not be hindered.
Ezra. And that which they have need of, both young bullocks,  rams,  lambs, for burnt offerings to the God of heaven, also wheat, salt, wine,  oil, according to the word of the priests who are at Jerusalem, let it be given them day by day without fail
Ezra. that they may offer sacrifices of sweet savor to the God of heaven,  pray for the life of the king,  of his sons.
Ezra. Also I have made a decree, that whoever shall alter this word, let a beam be pulled out from his house,  let him be lifted up and fastened thereon,  let his house be made a dunghill for this.
Ezra. And the God who has caused his name to dwell there overthrow all kings and peoples who shall put forth their hand to alter the same, to destroy this house of God which is at Jerusalem. I Darius have made a decree, let it be done with all diligence.
Ezra. Then Tattenai, the governor beyond the River, Shethar-bozenai,  their companions, because of what Darius the king had sent, did accordingly with all diligence.
Ezra. And the elders of the Jews built and prospered, through the prophesying of Haggai the prophet and Zechariah the son of Iddo. And they built and finished it according to the commandment of the God of Israel,  according to the decree of Cyrus,  Darius,  Artaxerxes king of Persia.
Ezra. And this house was finished on the third day of the month Adar, which was in the sixth year of the reign of Darius the king.
Ezra. And the sons of Israel, the priests,  the Levites,  the rest of the sons of the captivity, kept the dedication of this house of God with joy.
Ezra. And they offered at the dedication of this house of God a hundred bullocks, two hundred rams, four hundred lambs. And for a sin offering for all Israel, twelve he-goats, according to the number of the tribes of Israel.
Ezra. And they set the priests in their divisions,  the Levites in their divisions, for the service of God, which is at Jerusalem, as it is written in the book of Moses.
Ezra. And the sons of the captivity kept the Passover upon the fourteenth day of the first month.
Ezra. For the priests and the Levites had purified themselves together, all of them were pure. And they killed the Passover for all the sons of the captivity,  for their brothers the priests,  for themselves.
Ezra. And the sons of Israel who came again out of the captivity,  all such as had separated themselves to them from the filthiness of the nations of the land, to seek Jehovah, the God of Israel, ate,
Ezra. and kept the feast of unleavened bread seven days with joy. For Jehovah had made them joyful,  had turned the heart of the king of Assyria to them, to strengthen their hands in the work of the house of God, the God of Israel.
Ezra. Now after these things, in the reign of Artaxerxes king of Persia, Ezra the son of Seraiah, the son of Azariah, the son of Hilkiah,
Ezra. the son of Shallum, the son of Zadok, the son of Ahitub,
Ezra. the son of Amariah, the son of Azariah, the son of Meraioth,
Ezra. the son of Zerahiah, the son of Uzzi, the son of Bukki,
Ezra. the son of Abishua, the son of Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the chief priest,
Ezra. this Ezra went up from Babylon. And he was a skilled scribe in the law of Moses, which Jehovah, the God of Israel, had given. And the king granted him all his request, according to the hand of Jehovah his God upon him.
Ezra. And some of the sons of Israel,  of the priests,  the Levites,  the singers,  the porters,  the Nethinim, went up to Jerusalem in the seventh year of Artaxerxes the king.
Ezra. And he came to Jerusalem in the fifth month, which was in the seventh year of the king.
Ezra. For upon the first day of the first month he began to go up from Babylon,  on the first day of the fifth month he came to Jerusalem, according to the good hand of his God upon him.
Ezra. For Ezra had set his heart to seek the law of Jehovah,  to do it,  to teach in Israel statutes and ordinances.
Ezra. Now this is the copy of the letter that the king Artaxerxes gave to Ezra the priest, the scribe, even the scribe of the words of the commandments of Jehovah,  of his statutes to Israel:
Ezra. Artaxerxes, king of kings, to Ezra the priest, the scribe of the law of the God of heaven, perfect and so forth.
Ezra. I make a decree, that all those of the people of Israel,  their priests and the Levites, in my realm, who are minded of their own free will to go to Jerusalem, go with thee.
Ezra. Forasmuch as thou are sent from the king and his seven counselors, to inquire concerning Judah and Jerusalem, according to the law of thy God which is in thy hand,
Ezra. and to carry the silver and gold, which the king and his counselors have freely offered to the God of Israel, whose habitation is in Jerusalem,
Ezra. and all the silver and gold that thou shall find in all the province of Babylon, with the freewill offering of the people,  of the priests, offering willingly, for the house of their God which is in Jerusalem.
Ezra. Therefore thou shall with all diligence buy with this money bullocks, rams, lambs, with their meal offerings and their drink offerings,  shall offer them upon the altar of the house of your God which is in Jerusalem.
Ezra. And whatever shall seem good to thee and to thy brothers to do with the rest of the silver and the gold, that do ye after the will of your God.
Ezra. And the vessels that are given thee for the service of the house of thy God, deliver thou before the God of Jerusalem.
Ezra. And whatever more shall be needful for the house of thy God, which thou shall have occasion to bestow, bestow it out of the king's treasure-house.
Ezra. And I, even I Artaxerxes the king, do make a decree to all the treasurers who are beyond the River, that whatever Ezra the priest, the scribe of the law of the God of heaven, shall require of you, it be done with all diligence,
Ezra. to a hundred talents of silver,  to a hundred measures of wheat,  to a hundred baths of wine,  to a hundred baths of oil,  salt without prescribing how much.
Ezra. Whatever is commanded by the God of heaven, let it be done exactly for the house of the God of heaven; for why should there be wrath against the realm of the king and his sons?
Ezra. Also we certify to you, that concerning any of the priests and Levites, the singers, porters, Nethinim, or servants of this house of God, it shall not be lawful to impose tribute, custom, or toll, upon them.
Ezra. And thou, Ezra, according to the wisdom of thy God, that is in thy hand, appoint magistrates and judges, who may judge all the people who are beyond the River, all such as know the laws of thy God,  teach ye him who does not know them.
Ezra. And whoever will not do the law of thy God,  the law of the king, let judgment be executed upon him with all diligence, whether it be to death, or to banishment, or to confiscation of goods, or to imprisonment.
Ezra. Blessed be Jehovah, the God of our fathers, who has put such a thing as this in the king's heart, to beautify the house of Jehovah which is in Jerusalem,
Ezra. and has extended loving kindness to me before the king,  his counselors,  before all the king's mighty rulers. And I was strengthened according to the hand of Jehovah my God upon me,  I gathered together out of Israel chief men to go up with me.
Ezra. Now these are the heads of their fathers,  this is the genealogy of those who went up with me from Babylon, in the reign of Artaxerxes the king:
Ezra. of the sons of Phinehas, Gershom; of the sons of Ithamar, Daniel; of the sons of David, Hattush;
Ezra. of the sons of Shecaniah, of the sons of Parosh, Zechariah,  with him were reckoned by genealogy of the males a hundred and fifty;
Ezra. of the sons of Pahath-moab, Eliehoenai the son of Zerahiah,  with him two hundred males;
Ezra. of the sons of Shecaniah, the son of Jahaziel,  with him three hundred males;
Ezra. and of the sons of Adin, Ebed the son of Jonathan,  with him fifty males;
Ezra. and of the sons of Elam, Jeshaiah the son of Athaliah,  with him seventy males;
Ezra. and of the sons of Shephatiah, Zebadiah the son of Michael,  with him eighty males;
Ezra. of the sons of Joab, Obadiah the son of Jehiel,  with him two hundred and eighteen males;
Ezra. and of the sons of Shelomith, the son of Josiphiah,  with him a hundred and sixty males;
Ezra. and of the sons of Bebai, Zechariah the son of Bebai,  with him twenty-eight males;
Ezra. and of the sons of Azgad, Johanan the son of Hakkatan,  with him a hundred and ten males;
Ezra. And of the sons of Adonikam, who were the last,  these are their names: Eliphelet, Jeuel,  Shemaiah,  with them sixty males;
Ezra. and of the sons of Bigvai, Uthai and Zabbud,  with them seventy males.
Ezra. And I gathered them together to the river that runs to Ahava,  there we encamped three days. And I viewed the people,  the priests,  found there none of the sons of Levi.
Ezra. Then I sent for Eliezer, for Ariel, for Shemaiah,  for Elnathan,  for Jarib,  for Elnathan,  for Nathan,  for Zechariah,  for Meshullam, chief men, also for Joiarib,  for Elnathan, who were teachers.
Ezra. And I sent them forth to Iddo the chief at the place Casiphia,  I told them what they should say to Iddo,  his brothers the Nethinim, at the place Casiphia, that they should bring to us ministers for the house of our God.
Ezra. And according to the good hand of our God upon us they brought us a man of discretion, of the sons of Mahli, the son of Levi, the son of Israel,  Sherebiah, with his sons and his brothers, eighteen,
Ezra. and Hashabiah,  with him Jeshaiah of the sons of Merari, his brothers and their sons, twenty,
Ezra. and of the Nethinim, whom David and the rulers had given for the service of the Levites, two hundred and twenty Nethinim. All of them were mentioned by name.
Ezra. Then I proclaimed a fast there, at the river Ahava, that we might humble ourselves before our God, to seek of him a straight way for us,  for our little ones,  for all our substance.
Ezra. For I was ashamed to ask of the king a band of soldiers and horsemen to help us against the enemy in the way, because we had spoken to the king, saying, The hand of our God is upon all those who seek him, for good,  his power and his wrath are against all those who forsake him.
Ezra. So we fasted and besought our God for this,  he was entreated by us.
Ezra. Then I set apart twelve of the chiefs of the priests, even Sherebiah, Hashabiah,  ten of their brothers with them,
Ezra. and weighed to them the silver,  the gold,  the vessels, even the offering for the house of our God, which the king,  his counselors,  his rulers,  all Israel there present, had offered.
Ezra. I weighed into their hand six hundred and fifty talents of silver,  a hundred talents of silver vessels, a hundred talents of gold,
Ezra. and twenty bowls of gold, of a thousand darics,  two vessels of fine bright brass, precious as gold.
Ezra. And I said to them, Ye are holy to Jehovah,  the vessels are holy,  the silver and the gold are a freewill offering to Jehovah, the God of your fathers.
Ezra. Watch ye,  keep them, until ye weigh them before the chiefs of the priests and the Levites,  the rulers of the fathers of Israel, at Jerusalem, in the chambers of the house of Jehovah.
Ezra. So the priests and the Levites received the weight of the silver and the gold,  the vessels, to bring them to Jerusalem to the house of our God.
Ezra. Then we departed from the river Ahava on the twelfth day of the first month, to go to Jerusalem. And the hand of our God was upon us,  he delivered us from the hand of the enemy and the ambushment by the way.
Ezra. And we came to Jerusalem,  abode there three days.
Ezra. And on the fourth day the silver and the gold and the vessels were weighed in the house of our God into the hand of Meremoth the son of Uriah the priest,  with him was Eleazar the son of Phinehas,  with them was Jozabad the son of Jeshua,  Noadiah the son of Binnui, the Levite,
Ezra. the whole by number and by weight. And all the weight was written at that time.
Ezra. The sons of the captivity, who came out of exile, offered burnt offerings to the God of Israel, twelve bullocks for all Israel, ninety-six rams, seventy-seven lambs, twelve he-goats for a sin offering. All this was a burnt offering to Jehovah.
Ezra. And they delivered the king's commissions to the king's satraps,  to the governors beyond the River. And they furthered the people and the house of God.
Ezra. Now when these things were done, the rulers drew near to me, saying, The people of Israel,  the priests and the Levites, have not separated themselves from the peoples of the lands, doing according to their abominations, even of the Canaanites, the Hittites, the Perizzites, the Jebusites, the Ammonites, the Moabites, the Egyptians,  the Amorites.
Ezra. For they have taken of their daughters for themselves and for their sons, so that the holy seed have mingled themselves with the peoples of the lands. Yea, the hand of the heads and rulers has been chief in this trespass.
Ezra. And when I heard this thing, I tore my garment and my robe,  plucked off the hair of my head and of my beard,  sat down confounded.
Ezra. Then everyone who trembled at the words of the God of Israel were assembled to me, because of the trespass of those of the captivity,  I sat confounded until the evening oblation.
Ezra. And at the evening oblation I arose up from my humiliation, even with my garment and my robe torn,  I fell upon my knees,  spread out my hands to Jehovah my God,
Ezra. and I said, O my God, I am ashamed and blush to lift up my face to thee, my God, for our iniquities are increased over our head,  our guiltiness has grown up to the heavens.
Ezra. Since the days of our fathers we have been exceedingly guilty to this day. And for our iniquities have we, our kings,  our priests, been delivered into the hand of the kings of the lands, to the sword, to captivity,  to plunder,  to confusion of face, as it is this day.
Ezra. And now for a little moment grace has been shown from Jehovah our God, to leave us a remnant to escape,  to give us a nail in his holy place, that our God may lighten our eyes,  give us a little reviving in our bondage.
Ezra. For we are bondmen, yet our God has not forsaken us in our bondage,  has extended loving kindness to us in the sight of the kings of Persia, to give us a reviving, to set up the house of our God,  to repair the ruins of it,  to give us a wall in Judah and in Jerusalem.
Ezra. And now, O our God, what shall we say after this? For we have forsaken thy commandments,
Ezra. which thou have commanded by thy servants the prophets, saying, The land, to which ye go to possess it, is an unclean land through the uncleanness of the peoples of the lands, through their abominations, which have filled it from one end to another with their filthiness.
Ezra. Now therefore do not give your daughters to their sons, neither take their daughters to your sons, nor seek their peace or their prosperity forever, that ye may be strong,  eat the good of the land,  leave it for an inheritance to your sons forever.
Ezra. And after all that has come upon us for our evil deeds,  for our great guilt, seeing that thou our God have punished us less than our iniquities deserve,  have given us such a remnant,
Ezra. shall we again break thy commandments,  join in affinity with the peoples who do these abominations? Would thou not be angry with us till thou had consumed us, so that there should be no remnant, nor any to escape?
Ezra. O Jehovah, the God of Israel, thou are righteous, for we are left a remnant that is escaped, as it is this day. Behold, we are before thee in our guiltiness, for none can stand before thee because of this.
Ezra. Now while Ezra prayed and made confession, weeping and casting himself down before the house of God, there was gathered together to him out of Israel a very great assembly of men and women and children, for the people wept very much.
Ezra. And Shecaniah the son of Jehiel, one of the sons of Elam, answered and said to Ezra, We have trespassed against our God,  have married foreign women of the peoples of the land. Yet now there is hope for Israel concerning this thing.
Ezra. Now therefore let us make a covenant with our God to put away all the wives,  such as are born of them, according to the counsel of my lord,  of those who tremble at the commandment of our God,  let it be done according to the law.
Ezra. Arise, for the matter belongs to thee,  we are with thee. Be of good courage,  do it.
Ezra. Then Ezra arose,  made the chiefs of the priests, the Levites,  all Israel, to swear that they would do according to this word. So they swore.
Ezra. Then Ezra rose up from before the house of God,  went into the chamber of Jehohanan the son of Eliashib. And when he came there, he ate no bread, nor drank water, for he mourned because of the trespass of those of the captivity.
Ezra. And they made proclamation throughout Judah and Jerusalem to all the sons of the captivity, that they should gather themselves together to Jerusalem.
Ezra. And that whoever did not come within three days, according to the counsel of the rulers and the elders, all his substance should be forfeited,  himself separated from the assembly of the captivity.
Ezra. Then all the men of Judah and Benjamin gathered themselves together to Jerusalem within the three days. It was the ninth month, on the twentieth day of the month,  all the people sat in the broad place before the house of God, trembling because of this matter,  for the great rain.
Ezra. And Ezra the priest stood up,  said to them, Ye have trespassed,  have married foreign women to increase the guilt of Israel.
Ezra. Now therefore make confession to Jehovah, the God of your fathers,  do his pleasure,  separate yourselves from the peoples of the land,  from the foreign women.
Ezra. Then all the assembly answered and said with a loud voice, As thou have said concerning us, so must we do.
Ezra. But the people are many,  it is a time of much rain,  we are not able to stand outside. Neither is this a work of one day or two, for we have greatly transgressed in this matter.
Ezra. Let now our rulers be appointed for all the assembly,  let all those who are in our cities who have married foreign women come at appointed times,  with them the elders of every city,  the judges thereof, until the fierce wrath of our God be turned from us, until this matter be dispatched.
Ezra. Only Jonathan the son of Asahel and Jahzeiah the son of Tikvah stood up against this,  Meshullam and Shabbethai the Levite helped them.
Ezra. And the sons of the captivity did so. And Ezra the priest, with certain heads of fathers, after their fathers' houses,  all of them by their names, were set apart. And they sat down in the first day of the tenth month to examine the matter.
Ezra. And they made an end with all the men who had married foreign women by the first day of the first month.
Ezra. And among the sons of the priests there were found who had married foreign women, namely, of the sons of Jeshua, the son of Jozadak,  his brothers, Maaseiah,  Eliezer,  Jarib,  Gedaliah.
Ezra. And they gave their hand that they would put away their wives. And being guilty, they offered a ram of the flock for their guilt.
Ezra. And of the sons of Immer: Hanani and Zebadiah.
Ezra. And of the sons of Harim: Maaseiah,  Elijah,  Shemaiah,  Jehiel,  Uzziah.
Ezra. And of the sons of Pashhur: Elioenai, Maaseiah, Ishmael, Nethanel, Jozabad,  Elasah.
Ezra. And of the Levites: Jozabad,  Shimei,  Kelaiah (the same is Kelita), Pethahiah, Judah,  Eliezer.
Ezra. And of the singers: Eliashib. And of the porters: Shallum,  Telem,  Uri.
Ezra. And of Israel: Of the sons of Parosh, Ramiah,  Izziah,  Malchijah,  Mijamin,  Eleazar,  Malchijah,  Benaiah.
Ezra. And of the sons of Elam: Mattaniah, Zechariah,  Jehiel,  Abdi,  Jeremoth,  Elijah.
Ezra. And of the sons of Zattu: Elioenai, Eliashib, Mattaniah,  Jeremoth,  Zabad,  Aziza.
Ezra. And of the sons of Bebai: Jehohanan, Hananiah, Zabbai, Athlai.
Ezra. And of the sons of Bani: Meshullam, Malluch,  Adaiah, Jashub,  Sheal, Jeremoth.
Ezra. And of the sons of Pahath-moab: Adna,  Chelal, Benaiah, Maaseiah, Mattaniah, Bezalel,  Binnui,  Manasseh.
Ezra. And of the sons of Harim: Eliezer, Isshijah, Malchijah, Shemaiah, Shimeon,
Ezra. Benjamin, Malluch, Shemariah.
Ezra. Of the sons of Hashum: Mattenai, Mattattah, Zabad, Eliphelet, Jeremai, Manasseh, Shimei.
Ezra. Of the sons of Bani: Maadai, Amram,  Uel,
Ezra. Benaiah, Bedeiah, Cheluhi,
Ezra. Vaniah, Meremoth, Eliashib,
Ezra. Mattaniah, Mattenai,  Jaasu,
Ezra. and Bani,  Binnui, Shimei,
Ezra. and Shelemiah,  Nathan,  Adaiah,
Ezra. Machnadebai, Shashai, Sharai,
Ezra. Azarel,  Shelemiah, Shemariah,
Ezra. Shallum, Amariah, Joseph.
Ezra. Of the sons of Nebo: Jeiel, Mattithiah, Zabad, Zebina, Iddo,  Joel, Benaiah.
Ezra. All these had taken foreign wives,  some of them had wives by whom they had sons.
Nehemiah
The words of Nehemiah the son of Hacaliah. Now it came to pass in the month Chislev, in the twentieth year, as I was in Shushan the palace,
that Hanani, one of my brothers, came, he and certain men out of Judah. And I asked them concerning the Jews who had escaped, that were left of the captivity,  concerning Jerusalem.
they said to me, The remnant who are left of the captivity there in the province are in great affliction and reproach. Also the wall of Jerusalem is broken down,  the gates of it are burned with fire.
it came to pass, when I heard these words, that I sat down and wept,  mourned certain days. And I fasted and prayed before the God of heaven,
said, I beseech thee, O Jehovah, the God of heaven, the great and awesome God, who keeps covenant and loving kindness with those who love him and keep his commandments:
Let thine ear now be attentive,  thine eyes open, that thou may hearken to the prayer of thy servant, which I pray before thee at this time, day and night, for the sons of Israel thy servants while I confess the sins of the sons of Israel, which we have sinned against thee. Yea, I and my father's house have sinned.
We have dealt very corruptly against thee,  have not kept the commandments, nor the statutes, nor the ordinances, which thou commanded thy servant Moses.
Remember, I beseech thee, the word that thou commanded thy servant Moses, saying, If ye trespass, I will scatter you abroad among the peoples,
but if ye return to me,  keep my commandments and do them, though your outcasts were in the outermost part of the heavens, yet I will gather them from there,  will bring them to the place that I have chosen, to cause my name to dwell there.
Now these are thy servants and thy people whom thou have redeemed by thy great power,  by thy strong hand.
O Lord, I beseech thee, let now thine ear be attentive to the prayer of thy servant,  to the prayer of thy servants, who delight to fear thy name, , I pray thee, prosper thy servant this day,  grant him mercy in the sight of this man. Now I was cupbearer to the king.
it came to pass in the month Nisan, in the twentieth year of Artaxerxes the king, when wine was before him, that I took up the wine,  gave it to the king. Now I had not formerly been sad in his presence.
the king said to me, Why is thy countenance sad, seeing thou are not sick? This is nothing else but sorrow of heart. Then I was very much afraid.
I said to the king, Let the king live forever. Why should not my countenance be sad, when the city, the place of my fathers' sepulchers, lies waste,  the gates of it are consumed with fire?
Then the king said to me, For what do thou make request? So I prayed to the God of heaven.
I said to the king, If it please the king,  if thy servant has found favor in thy sight, that thou would send me to Judah, to the city of my fathers' sepulchers, that I may build it.
the king said to me (the queen also sitting by him), For how long shall thy journey be? And when will thou return? So it pleased the king to send me,  I set him a time.
Moreover I said to the king, If it please the king, let letters be given to me to the governors beyond the River, that they may let me pass through till I come to Judah,
a letter to Asaph the keeper of the king's forest, that he may give me timber to make beams for the gates of the castle which appertains to the house,  for the wall of the city,  for the house that I shall enter into. And the king granted me, according to the good hand of my God upon me.
Then I came to the governors beyond the River,  gave them the king's letters. Now the king had sent with me captains of the army and horsemen.
when Sanballat the Horonite,  Tobiah the servant, the Ammonite, heard of it, it grieved them exceedingly that there came a man to seek the welfare of the sons of Israel.
So I came to Jerusalem,  was there three days.
I arose in the night, I and some few men with me. I neither told any man what my God put into my heart to do for Jerusalem, nor was there any beast with me except the beast that I rode upon.
I went out by night by the valley gate, even toward the jackal's well and to the dung gate,  viewed the walls of Jerusalem, which were broken down,  the gates of it were consumed with fire.
Then I went on to the fountain gate and to the king's pool,  there was no place for the beast that was under me to pass.
Then I went up in the night by the brook,  viewed the wall. And I turned back,  entered by the valley gate,  so returned.
the rulers did not know where I went, or what I did, neither had I as yet told it to the Jews, nor to the priests, nor to the ranking men, nor to the rulers, nor to the rest who did the work.
Then I said to them, Ye see the evil condition that we are in, how Jerusalem lies waste,  the gates of it are burned with fire. Come,  let us build up the wall of Jerusalem that we be no more a reproach.
I told them of the hand of my God which was good upon me, as also of the king's words that he had spoken to me. And they said, Let us rise up and build. So they strengthened their hands for the good work.
But when Sanballat the Horonite,  Tobiah the servant, the Ammonite,  Geshem the Arabian, heard it, they laughed us to scorn,  despised us,  said, What is this thing that ye do? Will ye rebel against the king?
Then I answered them,  said to them, The God of heaven, he will prosper us. Therefore we his servants will arise and build,  ye have no portion, nor right, nor memorial, in Jerusalem.
Then Eliashib the high priest rose up with his brothers the priests,  they built the sheep gate. They sanctified it,  set up the doors of it, even to the tower of Hammeah they sanctified it, to the tower of Hananel.
next to him the men of Jericho built. And next to them Zaccur the son of Imri built.
the sons of Hassenaah built the fish gate. They laid the beams of it,  set up the doors of it, the bolts of it,  the bars of it.
next to them Meremoth the son of Uriah, the son of Hakkoz repaired. And next to them Meshullam the son of Berechiah, the son of Meshezabel repaired. And next to them Zadok the son of Baana repaired.
next to them the Tekoites repaired,  their ranking men did not put their necks to the work of their lord.
the old gate Joiada the son of Paseah and Meshullam the son of Besodeiah repaired. They laid the beams of it,  set up the doors of it,  the bolts of it,  the bars of it.
next to them Melatiah the Gibeonite,  Jadon the Meronothite, the men of Gibeon,  of Mizpah, who pertained to the throne of the governor beyond the River, repaired.
Next to him Uzziel the son of Harhaiah, goldsmiths, repaired. And next to him Hananiah one of the perfumers repaired. And they fortified Jerusalem even to the broad wall.
next to them Rephaiah the son of Hur, the ruler of half the district of Jerusalem, repaired.
next to them Jedaiah the son of Harumaph, repaired opposite his house. And next to him Hattush the son of Hashabneiah repaired.
Malchijah the son of Harim,  Hasshub the son of Pahath-moab, repaired another portion,  the tower of the furnaces.
next to him Shallum the son of Hallohesh, the ruler of half the district of Jerusalem, repaired, he and his daughters.
Hanun,  the inhabitants of Zanoah, repaired the valley gate. They built it,  set up the doors of it, the bolts of it,  the bars of it,  a thousand cubits of the wall to the dung gate.
Malchijah the son of Rechab, the ruler of the district of Beth-haccherem, repaired the dung gate. He built it,  set up the doors of it, the bolts of it,  the bars of it.
Shallun the son of Col-hozeh, the ruler of the district of Mizpah, repaired the fountain gate. He built it,  covered it,  set up the doors of it, the bolts of it,  the bars of it,  the wall of the pool of Shelah by the king's garden, even to the stairs that go down from the city of David.
After him Nehemiah the son of Azbuk, the ruler of half the district of Beth-zur, repaired to the place opposite the sepulchers of David,  to the pool that was made,  to the house of the mighty men.
After him the Levites, Rehum the son of Bani, repaired. Next to him Hashabiah, the ruler of half the district of Keilah, repaired for his district.
After him their brothers, Bavvai the son of Henadad, the ruler of half the district of Keilah, repaired.
next to him Ezer the son of Jeshua, the ruler of Mizpah, repaired another portion opposite the ascent to the armory at the turning of the wall.
After him Baruch the son of Zabbai earnestly repaired another portion, from the turning of the wall to the door of the house of Eliashib the high priest.
After him Meremoth the son of Uriah the son of Hakkoz repaired another portion, from the door of the house of Eliashib even to the end of the house of Eliashib.
after him the priests, the men of the Plain, repaired.
After them Benjamin and Hasshub repaired opposite their house. After them Azariah the son of Maaseiah the son of Ananiah repaired beside his own house.
After him Binnui the son of Henadad repaired another portion, from the house of Azariah to the turning of the wall,  to the corner.
Palal the son of Uzai repaired opposite the turning of the wall,  the tower that stands out from the upper house of the king, which is by the court of the guard. After him Pedaiah the son of Parosh repaired.
Now the Nethinim dwelt in Ophel, to the place opposite the water gate toward the east,  the tower that stands out.)
After him the Tekoites repaired another portion, opposite the great tower that stands out,  to the wall of Ophel.
The priests repaired above the horse gate, every man opposite his own house.
After them Zadok the son of Immer repaired opposite his own house. And after him Shemaiah the son of Shecaniah, the keeper of the east gate, repaired.
After him Hananiah the son of Shelemiah,  Hanun the sixth son of Zalaph, repaired another portion. After him Meshullam the son of Berechiah repaired opposite his chamber.
After him Malchijah one of the goldsmiths to the house of the Nethinim,  of the merchants, repaired opposite the gate of Hammiphkad,  to the ascent of the corner.
between the ascent of the corner and the sheep gate the goldsmiths and the merchants repaired.
But it came to pass that, when Sanballat heard that we were building the wall, he was angry,  took great indignation,  mocked the Jews.
he spoke before his brothers and the army of Samaria,  said, What are these feeble Jews doing? Will they fortify themselves? Will they sacrifice? Will they finish in a day? Will they revive the stones out of the heaps of rubbish, seeing they are burnt?
Now Tobiah the Ammonite was by him,  he said, Even that which they are building, if a fox goes up he shall break down their stone wall.
Hear, O our God, for we are despised,  so turn back their reproach upon their own head,  give them up for a spoil in a land of captivity,
do not cover their iniquity,  let not their sin be blotted out from before thee, for they have provoked thee to anger before the builders.
So we built the wall,  all the wall was joined together to half the height of it, for the people had a mind to work.
But it came to pass that, when Sanballat,  Tobiah,  the Arabians,  the Ammonites,  the Ashdodites, heard that the repairing of the walls of Jerusalem went forward,  that the breaches began to be stopped, then they were very angry,
all of them together conspired to come and fight against Jerusalem,  to cause confusion therein.
But we made our prayer to our God,  set a watch against them day and night, because of them.
Judah said, The strength of the bearers of burdens has become feeble,  there is much rubbish, so that we are not able to build the wall.
our adversaries said, They shall not know, neither see, till we come into the midst of them,  kill them,  cause the work to cease.
it came to pass that, when the Jews who dwelt by them came, they said to us ten times, From all places from where ye shall return to us they will be upon you.
Therefore I set in the lowest parts of the space behind the wall, in the open places, I set there the people after their families with their swords, their spears,  their bows.
I looked,  rose up,  said to the ranking men,  to the rulers,  to the rest of the people, Be not ye afraid of them. Remember the Lord, who is great and awesome,  fight for your brothers, your sons,  your daughters, your wives,  your houses.
it came to pass, when our enemies heard that it was known to us,  God had brought their counsel to naught, that we returned all of us to the wall, every man to his work.
it came to pass from that time forth, that half of my servants labored in the work,  half of them held the spears, the shields,  the bows,  the coats of mail. And the rulers were behind all the house of Judah.
They all built the wall,  those who bore burdens loaded themselves, every man with one of his hands labored in the work,  with the other held his weapon,
the builders, every man had his sword girded by his side,  so built. And he who sounded the trumpet was by me.
I said to the ranking men,  to the rulers and to the rest of the people, The work is great and large,  we are separated upon the wall, one far from another.
In whatever place ye hear the sound of the trumpet, gather ye there to us, our God will fight for us.
So we labored in the work,  half of them held the spears from the rising of the morning till the stars appeared.
Likewise at the same time I said to the people, Let each with his servant lodge within Jerusalem that in the night they may be a guard to us,  may labor in the day.
So neither I, nor my brothers, nor my servants, nor the men of the guard who followed me, none of us put off our clothes, everyone went with his weapon to the water.
Then there arose a great cry of the people and of their wives against their brothers the Jews.
For there were who said, We, our sons and our daughters, are many. Let us get grain that we may eat and live.
There were some also who said, We are mortgaging our fields,  our vineyards,  our houses. Let us get grain because of the dearth.
There were also who said, We have borrowed money for the king's tribute upon our fields and our vineyards.
Yet now our flesh is as the flesh of our brothers, our sons as their sons. And, lo, we bring into bondage our sons and our daughters to be servants,  some of our daughters are brought into bondage already. Neither is it in our power to help it, for other men have our fields and our vineyards.
I was very angry when I heard their cry and these words.
Then I consulted with myself,  contended with the ranking men and the rulers,  said to them, Ye exact usury, everyone of his brother. And I held a great assembly against them.
I said to them, According to our ability we have redeemed our brothers the Jews, who were sold to the nations,  would ye even sell your brothers,  should they be sold to us? Then they were silent,  found not a word.
Also I said, The thing that ye do is not good. Ought ye not to walk in the fear of our God, because of the reproach of the nations our enemies?
I likewise, my brothers and my servants, lend them money and grain. I pray you, let us leave off this usury.
Restore, I pray you, to them, even this day, their fields, their vineyards, their oliveyards,  their houses, also the hundredth part of the money,  of the grain, the new wine,  the oil, that ye exact of them.
Then they said, We will restore them,  will require nothing of them, so will we do, even as thou say. Then I called the priests,  took an oath from them that they would do according to this promise.
Also I shook out my lap,  said, So God shake out every man from his house,  from his labor, who does not perform this promise, even thus be he shaken out and emptied. And all the assembly said, Truly,  praised Jehovah. And the people did according to this promise.
Moreover from the time that I was appointed to be their governor in the land of Judah, from the twentieth year even to the thirty-second year of Artaxerxes the king, that is, twelve years, I and my brothers have not eaten the bread of the governor.
But the former governors who were before me charged the people,  took bread and wine from them, besides forty shekels of silver. Yes, even their servants bore rule over the people. But I did not so, because of the fear of God.
Yea, also I continued in the work of this wall, neither did we buy any land. And all my servants were gathered there to the work.
Moreover there were at my table, of the Jews and the rulers, a hundred and fifty men, besides those who came to us from among the nations that were round about us.
Now that which was prepared for one day was one ox and six choice sheep, also fowls were prepared for me,  once in ten days store of all sorts of wine. Yet for all this I did not demand the bread of the governor, because the bondage was heavy upon this people.
Remember to me, O my God, for good, all that I have done for this people.
Now it came to pass, when it was reported to Sanballat and Tobiah,  to Geshem the Arabian,  to the rest of our enemies, that I had built the wall,  that there was no breach left in it, (though even to that time I had not set up the doors in the gates),
that Sanballat and Geshem sent to me, saying, Come, let us meet together in one of the villages in the plain of Ono. But they thought to do me mischief.
I sent messengers to them, saying, I am doing a great work, so that I cannot come down. Why should the work cease while I leave it,  come down to you?
they sent to me four times after this sort,  I answered them after the same manner.
Then Sanballat sent his servant to me in like manner the fifth time with an open letter in his hand
in which was written, It is reported among the nations,  Gashmu says it, that thou and the Jews think to rebel, for which cause thou are building the wall. And thou would be their king according to these words.
thou have also appointed prophets to preach of thee at Jerusalem, saying, There is a king in Judah. And now it shall be reported to the king according to these words. Come now therefore,  let us take counsel together.
Then I sent to him, saying, There are no such things done as thou say,  thou imagine them out of thine own heart.
For they all would have made us afraid, saying, Their hands shall be weakened from the work that it not be done. But now, O God, strengthen thou my hands.
I went to the house of Shemaiah the son of Delaiah the son of Mehetabel, who was shut up,  he said, Let us meet together in the house of God, within the temple,  let us shut the doors of the temple. For they will come to kill thee, yea, they will come to kill thee in the night.
I said, Should such a man as I flee? And who is there, that, being such as I, would go into the temple to save his life? I will not go in.
I discerned, , lo, God had not sent him,  he pronounced this prophecy against me,  Tobiah and Sanballat had hired him.
For this cause he was hired, that I should be afraid,  do so,  sin,  that they might have matter for an evil report, that they might reproach me.
Remember, O my God, Tobiah and Sanballat according to these their works,  also the prophetess Noadiah,  the rest of the prophets, who would have put me in fear.
So the wall was finished in the twenty-fifth day of the month Elul, in fifty-two days.
it came to pass, when all our enemies heard of it, that all the nations that were around us feared,  were much cast down in their own eyes, for they perceived that this work was wrought of our God.
Moreover in those days the ranking men of Judah sent many letters to Tobiah,  the letters of Tobiah came to them.
For there were many in Judah sworn to him because he was the son-in-law of Shecaniah the son of Arah,  his son Jehohanan had taken the daughter of Meshullam the son of Berechiah to wife.
Also they spoke of his good deeds before me,  reported my words to him. And Tobiah sent letters to put me in fear.
Now it came to pass, when the wall was built,  I had set up the doors,  the porters and the singers and the Levites were appointed,
that I gave my brother Hanani,  Hananiah the governor of the castle, charge over Jerusalem, for he was a faithful man,  feared God above many.
I said to them, Let not the gates of Jerusalem be opened until the sun be hot,  while they stand on guard, let them shut the doors,  bar ye them. And appoint watchmen of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, everyone in his watch,  everyone to be opposite his house.
Now the city was wide and large,  the people in it were few,  the houses were not built.
my God put into my heart to gather together the ranking men,  the rulers,  the people, that they might be reckoned by genealogy. And I found the book of the genealogy of those who came up at the first. And I found written therein:
These are the sons of the province who went up out of the captivity of those who had been carried away, whom Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon had carried away,  who returned to Jerusalem and to Judah, everyone to his city,
who came with Zerubbabel, Jeshua, Nehemiah, Azariah, Raamiah, Nahamani, Mordecai, Bilshan, Mispereth, Bigvai, Nehum, Baanah. The number of the men of the people of Israel:
the sons of Parosh, two thousand a hundred and seventy-two;
the sons of Shephatiah, three hundred seventy and two;
the sons of Arah, six hundred fifty-two;
the sons of Pahath-moab, of the sons of Jeshua and Joab, two thousand and eight hundred and eighteen;
the sons of Elam, a thousand two hundred fifty-four;
the sons of Zattu, eight hundred forty-five;
the sons of Zaccai, seven hundred and sixty;
the sons of Binnui, six hundred forty-eight;
the sons of Bebai, six hundred twenty-eight;
the sons of Azgad, two thousand three hundred twenty-two;
the sons of Adonikam, six hundred sixty-seven;
the sons of Bigvai, two thousand sixty-seven;
the sons of Adin, six hundred fifty-five;
the sons of Ater, of Hezekiah, ninety-eight;
the sons of Hashum, three hundred twenty-eight;
the sons of Bezai, three hundred twenty-four;
the sons of Hariph, a hundred and twelve;
the sons of Gibeon, ninety-five;
the men of Bethlehem and Netophah, a hundred eighty-eight;
the men of Anathoth, a hundred twenty-eight;
the men of Beth-azmaveth, forty-two;
the men of Kiriath-jearim, Chephirah,  Beeroth, seven hundred forty-three;
the men of Ramah and Geba, six hundred twenty-one;
the men of Michmas, a hundred and twenty-two;
the men of Bethel and Ai, a hundred twenty-three;
the men of the other Nebo, fifty-two;
the sons of the other Elam, a thousand two hundred fifty-four;
the sons of Harim, three hundred and twenty;
the sons of Jericho, three hundred forty-five;
the sons of Lod, Hadid,  Ono, seven hundred twenty-one;
the sons of Senaah, three thousand nine hundred and thirty.
The priests: the sons of Jedaiah, of the house of Jeshua, nine hundred seventy-three;
the sons of Immer, a thousand fifty-two;
the sons of Pashhur, a thousand two hundred forty-seven;
the sons of Harim, a thousand and seventeen.
The Levites: the sons of Jeshua, of Kadmiel, of the sons of Hodevah, seventy-four.
The singers: the sons of Asaph, a hundred forty-eight.
The porters: the sons of Shallum, the sons of Ater, the sons of Talmon, the sons of Akkub, the sons of Hatita, the sons of Shobai, a hundred thirty-eight.
The Nethinim: the sons of Ziha, the sons of Hasupha, the sons of Tabbaoth,
the sons of Keros, the sons of Sia, the sons of Padon,
the sons of Lebana, the sons of Hagaba, the sons of Salmai,
the sons of Hanan, the sons of Giddel, the sons of Gahar,
the sons of Reaiah, the sons of Rezin, the sons of Nekoda,
the sons of Gazzam, the sons of Uzza, the sons of Paseah.
The sons of Besai, the sons of Meunim, the sons of Nephushesim,
the sons of Bakbuk, the sons of Hakupha, the sons of Harhur,
the sons of Bazlith, the sons of Mehida, the sons of Harsha,
the sons of Barkos, the sons of Sisera, the sons of Temah,
the sons of Neziah, the sons of Hatipha.
The sons of Solomon's servants: the sons of Sotai, the sons of Sophereth, the sons of Perida,
the sons of Jaala, the sons of Darkon, the sons of Giddel,
the sons of Shephatiah, the sons of Hattil, the sons of Pochereth-hazzebaim, the sons of Amon.
All the Nethinim and the sons of Solomon's servants, were three hundred ninety-two.
these were those who went up from Tel-melah, Tel-harsha, Cherub, Addon,  Immer,  they could not show their fathers' house, nor their seed, whether they were of Israel:
The sons of Delaiah, the sons of Tobiah, the sons of Nekoda, six hundred forty-two.
of the priests: the sons of Hobaiah, the sons of Hakkoz, the sons of Barzillai, who took a wife of the daughters of Barzillai the Gileadite,  was called after their name.
These sought their registration among those who were reckoned by genealogy,  it was not found. Therefore they were deemed polluted and put from the priesthood.
the governor said to them that they should not eat of the most holy things till there stood up a priest with Urim and Thummim.
The whole assembly together was forty-two thousand three hundred and sixty,
besides their men-servants and their maid-servants, of whom there were seven thousand three hundred thirty-seven. And they had two hundred forty-five singing men and singing women.
Their horses were seven hundred thirty-six, their mules, two hundred forty-five,
their camels, four hundred thirty-five, their donkeys, six thousand seven hundred and twenty.
some from among the heads of fathers gave to the work. The governor gave to the treasury a thousand darics of gold, fifty basins, five hundred and thirty priests' garments.
some of the heads of fathers gave into the treasury of the work twenty thousand darics of gold,  two thousand and two hundred pounds of silver.
that which the rest of the people gave was twenty thousand darics of gold,  two thousand pounds of silver,  sixty-seven priests' garments.
So the priests,  the Levites,  the porters,  the singers,  some of the people,  the Nethinim,  all Israel, dwelt in their cities. And when the seventh month came, the sons of Israel were in their cities.
all the people gathered themselves together as one man into the broad place that was before the water gate. And they spoke to Ezra the scribe to bring the book of the law of Moses, which Jehovah had commanded to Israel.
Ezra the priest brought the law before the assembly, both men and women,  all who could hear with understanding, upon the first day of the seventh month.
he read in it before the broad place that was before the water gate from early morning until midday, in the presence of the men and the women,  of those who could understand. And the ears of all the people were attentive to the book of the law.
Ezra the scribe stood upon a pulpit of wood, which they had made for the purpose. And beside him stood Mattithiah,  Shema,  Anaiah,  Uriah,  Hilkiah,  Maaseiah, on his right hand,  on his left hand, Pedaiah,  Mishael,  Malchijah,  Hashum,  Hashbaddanah, Zechariah,  Meshullam.
Ezra opened the book in the sight of all the people (for he was above all the people),  when he opened it, all the people stood up.
Ezra blessed Jehovah, the great God. And all the people answered, Truly, Truly, with the lifting up of their hands. And they bowed their heads,  worshiped Jehovah with their faces to the ground.
Also Jeshua,  Bani,  Sherebiah, Jamin, Akkub, Shabbethai, Hodiah, Maaseiah, Kelita, Azariah, Jozabad, Hanan, Pelaiah,  the Levites, caused the people to understand the law. And the people stood in their place.
they read in the book, in the law of God, distinctly,  they gave the sense, so that they understood the reading.
Nehemiah, who was the governor,  Ezra the priest the scribe,  the Levites who taught the people, said to all the people, This day is holy to Jehovah your God; do not mourn nor weep. For all the people wept when they heard the words of the law.
Then he said to them, Go your way, eat fat things,  drink sweet things,  send portions to him for whom nothing is prepared. For this day is holy to our Lord; neither be ye grieved, for the joy of Jehovah is your strength.
So the Levites quieted all the people, saying, Be silent, for the day is holy, neither be ye grieved.
all the people went their way to eat,  to drink,  to send portions,  to make great mirth, because they had understood the words that were declared to them.
on the second day were gathered together the heads of fathers of all the people, the priests,  the Levites, to Ezra the scribe, even to give attention to the words of the law.
they found written in the law how that Jehovah had commanded by Moses that the sons of Israel should dwell in booths in the feast of the seventh month,
that they should publish and proclaim in all their cities,  in Jerusalem, saying, Go forth to the mount,  fetch olive branches,  branches of wild olive,  myrtle branches,  palm branches,  branches of thick trees, to make booths, as it is written.
So the people went forth,  brought them,  made themselves booths, each one upon the roof of his house,  in their courts,  in the courts of the house of God,  in the broad place of the water gate,  in the broad place of the gate of Ephraim.
all the assembly of those who came again out of the captivity made booths,  dwelt in the booths, for since the days of Jeshua the son of Nun to that day the sons of Israel had not done so. And there was very great gladness.
Also day by day, from the first day to the last day, he read in the book of the law of God. And they kept the feast seven days,  on the eighth day was a solemn assembly according to the ordinance.
Now in the twenty-fourth day of this month the sons of Israel were assembled with fasting,  with sackcloth,  earth upon them.
the seed of Israel separated themselves from all foreigners,  stood and confessed their sins,  the iniquities of their fathers.
they stood up in their place,  read in the book of the law of Jehovah their God a fourth part of the day,  another fourth part they confessed,  worshiped Jehovah their God.
Then Jeshua,  Bani, Kadmiel, Shebaniah, Bunni, Sherebiah, Bani,  Chenani, stood up upon the stairs of the Levites,  cried with a loud voice to Jehovah their God.
Then the Levites, Jeshua,  Kadmiel, Bani, Hashabneiah, Sherebiah, Hodiah, Shebaniah,  Pethahiah, said, Stand up and bless Jehovah your God from everlasting to everlasting. And blessed be thy glorious name, which is exalted above all blessing and praise.
Thou are Jehovah, even thou alone, thou have made heaven, the heaven of heavens, with all their host, the earth and all things that are on it, the seas and all that is in them,  thou preserve them all. And the host of heaven worships thee.
Thou are Jehovah, the God who chose Abram,  brought him forth out of Ur of the Chaldees,  gave him the name of Abraham,
found his heart faithful before thee,  made a covenant with him to give the land of the Canaanite, the Hittite, the Amorite,  the Perizzite,  the Jebusite,  the Girgashite, to give it to his seed,  have performed thy words, for thou are righteous.
thou saw the affliction of our fathers in Egypt,  heard their cry by the Red Sea,
showed signs and wonders upon Pharaoh,  on all his servants,  on all the people of his land, for thou knew that they dealt proudly against them,  got thee a name, as it is this day.
thou divided the sea before them, so that they went through the midst of the sea on the dry land. And thou cast their pursuers into the depths as a stone into the mighty waters.
Moreover in a pillar of cloud thou led them by day,  in a pillar of fire by night, to give them light in the way in which they should go.
Thou also came down upon mount Sinai,  spoke with them from heaven,  gave them right ordinances and true laws, good statutes and commandments,
made known to them thy holy sabbath,  commanded them commandments,  statutes,  a law, by Moses thy servant.
thou gave them bread from heaven for their hunger,  brought forth water for them out of the rock for their thirst,  commanded them that they should go in to possess the land which thou had sworn to give them.
But they and our fathers dealt proudly and stiffened their neck,  did not hearken to thy commandments,
refused to obey, neither were mindful of thy wonders that thou did among them,  stiffened their neck. And in their rebellion they appointed a captain to return to their bondage. But thou are a God ready to pardon, gracious and merciful, slow to anger,  abundant in loving kindness,  did not forsake them.
Yea, when they had made a molten calf for them,  said, This is thy God that brought thee up out of Egypt,  had wrought great provocations,
yet thou in thy manifold mercies did not forsake them in the wilderness. The pillar of cloud did not depart from over them by day to lead them in the way, neither the pillar of fire by night to show them light,  the way in which they should go.
Thou also gave thy good Spirit to instruct them,  did not withhold thy manna from their mouth,  gave them water for their thirst.
Yea, forty years thou sustained them in the wilderness,  they lacked nothing; their clothes did not grow old,  their feet did not swell.
Moreover thou gave them kingdoms and peoples, which thou allotted after their portions. So they possessed the land of Sihon, even the land of the king of Heshbon,  the land of Og king of Bashan.
Their sons thou also multiplied as the stars of heaven,  brought them into the land concerning which thou said to their fathers that they should go in to possess it.
So the sons went in and possessed the land. And thou subdued the inhabitants of the land before them, the Canaanites,  gave them into their hands, with their kings,  the peoples of the land, that they might do with them as they would.
they took fortified cities,  a fat land,  possessed houses full of all good things, cisterns hewn out, vineyards,  oliveyards,  fruit trees in abundance. So they ate,  were filled,  became fat,  delighted themselves in thy great goodness.
Nevertheless they were disobedient,  rebelled against thee,  cast thy law behind their back,  killed thy prophets who testified against them to turn them again to thee,  they wrought great provocations.
Therefore thou delivered them into the hand of their adversaries, who distressed them. And in the time of their trouble, when they cried to thee, thou heard from heaven,  according to thy manifold mercies thou gave them saviors who saved them out of the hand of their adversaries.
But after they had rest, they again did evil before thee. Therefore thou left them in the hand of their enemies, so that they had the dominion over them. Yet when they returned,  cried to thee, thou heard from heaven,  many times thou delivered them according to thy mercies,
testified against them, that thou might bring them again to thy law. Yet they dealt proudly,  did not hearken to thy commandments,  sinned against thine ordinances (which if a man does, he shall live in them),  withdrew the shoulder,  stiffened their neck,  would not hear.
Yet many years thou bore with them,  testified against them by thy Spirit through thy prophets. Yet they would not give ear. Therefore thou gave them into the hand of the peoples of the lands.
Nevertheless in thy manifold mercies thou did not make a full end of them, nor forsake them, for thou are a gracious and merciful God.
Now therefore, our God, the great, the mighty,  the awesome God, who keeps covenant and loving kindness, let not all the travail seem little before thee, that has come upon us, on our kings, on our rulers,  on our priests,  on our prophets,  on our fathers,  on all thy people, since the time of the kings of Assyria to this day.
However thou are just in all that has come upon us, for thou have dealt truly,  we have done wickedly,
neither have our kings, our rulers, our priests, nor our fathers, kept thy law, nor hearkened to thy commandments and thy testimonies with which thou testified against them.
For they have not served thee in their kingdom,  in thy great goodness that thou gave them,  in the large and fat land which thou gave before them, neither did they turn from their wicked works.
Behold, we are servants this day,  as for the land that thou gave to our fathers to eat the fruit of it and the good of it, behold, we are servants in it.
it yields much increase to the kings whom thou have set over us because of our sins. Also they have power over our bodies,  over our cattle, at their pleasure,  we are in great distress.
yet for all this we make a sure covenant,  write it,  our rulers, our Levites,  our priests, seal to it.
Now those who sealed were: Nehemiah the governor, the son of Hacaliah,  Zedekiah,
Seraiah, Azariah, Jeremiah,
Pashhur, Amariah, Malchijah,
Hattush, Shebaniah, Malluch,
Harim, Meremoth, Obadiah,
Daniel, Ginnethon, Baruch,
Meshullam, Abijah, Mijamin,
Maaziah, Bilgai, Shemaiah. These were the priests.
the Levites: namely, Jeshua the son of Azaniah, Binnui of the sons of Henadad, Kadmiel,
their brothers, Shebaniah, Hodiah, Kelita, Pelaiah, Hanan,
Mica, Rehob, Hashabiah,
Zaccur, Sherebiah, Shebaniah,
Hodiah, Bani, Beninu.
The chiefs of the people: Parosh, Pahath-moab, Elam, Zattu, Bani,
Bunni, Azgad, Bebai,
Adonijah, Bigvai, Adin,
Ater, Hezekiah, Azzur,
Hodiah, Hashum, Bezai,
Hariph, Anathoth, Nobai,
Magpiash, Meshullam, Hezir,
Meshezabel, Zadok, Jaddua,
Pelatiah, Hanan, Anaiah,
Hoshea, Hananiah, Hasshub,
Hallohesh, Pilha, Shobek,
Rehum, Hashabnah, Maaseiah,
Ahiah, Hanan, Anan,
Malluch, Harim, Baanah.
the rest of the people-the priests, the Levites, the porters, the singers, the Nethinim,  all those who had separated themselves from the peoples of the lands to the law of God, their wives, their sons,  their daughters, everyone who had knowledge and understanding-
they clung to their brothers, their ranking men,  entered into a curse,  into an oath, to walk in God's law, which was given by Moses the servant of God,  to observe and do all the commandments of Jehovah our Lord,  his ordinances and his statutes.
that we would not give our daughters to the peoples of the land, nor take their daughters for our sons.
if the peoples of the land bring wares or any grain on the sabbath day to sell, that we would not buy from them on the sabbath, or on a holy day. And that we would forego the seventh year,  the exaction of every debt.
Also we made ordinances for us, to charge ourselves yearly with the third part of a shekel for the service of the house of our God,
for the showbread,  for the continual meal offering,  for the continual burnt offering, for the sabbaths, for the new moons, for the set feasts,  for the holy things,  for the sin offerings to make atonement for Israel,  for all the work of the house of our God.
we cast lots, the priests, the Levites,  the people, for the wood offering, to bring it into the house of our God, according to our fathers' houses, at times appointed, year by year, to burn upon the altar of Jehovah our God, as it is written in the law,
to bring the first-fruits of our ground,  the first-fruits of all fruit of all manner of trees, year by year, to the house of Jehovah,
also the firstborn of our sons,  of our cattle, as it is written in the law,  the firstlings of our herds and of our flocks, to bring to the house of our God, to the priests who minister in the house of our God,
that we should bring the first-fruits of our dough,  our heave offerings,  the fruit of all manner of trees, the new wine and the oil, to the priests, to the chambers of the house of our God,  the tithes of our ground to the Levites, for they, the Levites, take the tithes in all the cities of our tillage.
the priest the son of Aaron shall be with the Levites when the Levites take tithes. And the Levites shall bring up the tithe of the tithes to the house of our God, to the chambers, into the treasure-house.
For the sons of Israel and the sons of Levi shall bring the heave offering of the grain, of the new wine,  of the oil, to the chambers, where are the vessels of the sanctuary,  the priests that minister,  the porters,  the singers. And we will not forsake the house of our God.
the rulers of the people dwelt in Jerusalem. The rest of the people also cast lots to bring one of ten to dwell in Jerusalem the holy city,  nine parts in the other cities.
the people blessed all the men who willingly offered themselves to dwell in Jerusalem.
Now these are the chiefs of the province who dwelt in Jerusalem. But in the cities of Judah everyone dwells in his possession in their cities, namely, Israel, the priests,  the Levites,  the Nethinim,  the sons of Solomon's servants.
in Jerusalem certain of the sons of Judah,  of the sons of Benjamin dwelt. Of the sons of Judah: Athaiah the son of Uzziah, the son of Zechariah, the son of Amariah, the son of Shephatiah, the son of Mahalalel, of the sons of Perez;
Maaseiah the son of Baruch, the son of Col-hozeh, the son of Hazaiah, the son of Adaiah, the son of Joiarib, the son of Zechariah, the son of the Shilonite.
All the sons of Perez who dwelt in Jerusalem were four hundred sixty-eight valiant men.
these are the sons of Benjamin: Sallu the son of Meshullam, the son of Joed, the son of Pedaiah, the son of Kolaiah, the son of Maaseiah, the son of Ithiel, the son of Jeshaiah.
after him Gabbai, Sallai, nine hundred twenty-eight.
Joel the son of Zichri was their overseer,  Judah the son of Hassenuah was second over the city.
Of the priests: Jedaiah the son of Joiarib, Jachin,
Seraiah the son of Hilkiah, the son of Meshullam, the son of Zadok, the son of Meraioth, the son of Ahitub, the ruler of the house of God,
their brothers who did the work of the house, eight hundred twenty-two; and Adaiah the son of Jeroham, the son of Pelaliah, the son of Amzi, the son of Zechariah, the son of Pashhur, the son of Malchijah,
his brothers, chiefs of fathers, two hundred forty-two; and Amashsai the son of Azarel, the son of Ahzai, the son of Meshillemoth, the son of Immer,
their brothers, mighty men of valor, a hundred twenty-eight,  their overseer was Zabdiel, the son of Haggedolim.
of the Levites: Shemaiah the son of Hasshub, the son of Azrikam, the son of Hashabiah, the son of Bunni,
Shabbethai and Jozabad of the chiefs of the Levites who had the oversight of the outward business of the house of God,
Mattaniah the son of Mica, the son of Zabdi, the son of Asaph, who was the chief to begin the thanksgiving in prayer,  Bakbukiah, the second among his brothers,  Abda the son of Shammua, the son of Galal, the son of Jeduthun.
All the Levites in the holy city were two hundred eighty-four.
Moreover the porters, Akkub, Talmon,  their brothers, who kept watch at the gates, were a hundred seventy-two.
the rest of Israel, of the priests, the Levites, were in all the cities of Judah, everyone in his inheritance.
But the Nethinim dwelt in Ophel. And Ziha and Gishpa were over the Nethinim.
The overseer also of the Levites at Jerusalem was Uzzi the son of Bani, the son of Hashabiah, the son of Mattaniah, the son of Mica, of the sons of Asaph, the singers, over the business of the house of God.
For there was a commandment from the king concerning them,  a settled provision for the singers, as every day required.
Pethahiah the son of Meshezabel, of the sons of Zerah the son of Judah, was at the king's hand in all matters concerning the people.
as for the villages, with their fields, some of the sons of Judah dwelt in Kiriath-arba and the towns of it,  in Dibon and the towns of it,  in Jekabzeel and the villages of it,
in Jeshua,  in Moladah,  Beth-pelet,
in Hazar-shual,  in Beersheba and the towns of it,
in Ziklag,  in Meconah and in the towns of it,
in En-rimmon,  in Zorah,  in Jarmuth,
Zanoah, Adullam,  their villages, Lachish and the fields of it, Azekah and the towns of it. So they encamped from Beersheba to the valley of Hinnom.
The sons of Benjamin also dwelt from Geba onward, at Michmash and Aija,  at Bethel and the towns of it,
at Anathoth, Nob, Ananiah,
Hazor, Ramah, Gittaim,
Hadid, Zeboim, Neballat,
Lod,  Ono, the valley of craftsmen.
of the Levites, certain courses in Judah were joined to Benjamin.
Now these are the priests and the Levites who went up with Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel,  Jeshua: Seraiah, Jeremiah, Ezra,
Amariah, Malluch, Hattush,
Shecaniah, Rehum, Meremoth,
Iddo, Ginnethoi, Abijah,
Mijamin, Maadiah, Bilgah,
Shemaiah,  Joiarib, Jedaiah.
Sallu, Amok, Hilkiah, Jedaiah. These were the chiefs of the priests and of their brothers in the days of Jeshua.
Moreover the Levites: Jeshua, Binnui, Kadmiel, Sherebiah, Judah,  Mattaniah, who was over the thanksgiving, he and his brothers.
Also Bakbukiah and Unno, their brothers, were opposite them according to their offices.
Jeshua begot Joiakim,  Joiakim begot Eliashib,  Eliashib begot Joiada,
Joiada begot Jonathan,  Jonathan begot Jaddua.
in the days of Joiakim were priests, heads of fathers: of Seraiah, Meraiah, of Jeremiah, Hananiah,
of Ezra, Meshullam, of Amariah, Jehohanan,
of Malluchi, Jonathan, of Shebaniah, Joseph,
of Harim, Adna, of Meraioth, Helkai,
of Iddo, Zechariah, of Ginnethon, Meshullam,
of Abijah, Zichri, of Miniamin, of Moadiah, Piltai,
of Bilgah, Shammua, of Shemaiah, Jehonathan,
of Joiarib, Mattenai, of Jedaiah, Uzzi,
of Sallai, Kallai, of Amok, Eber,
of Hilkiah, Hashabiah, of Jedaiah, Nethanel.
As for the Levites, in the days of Eliashib, Joiada,  Johanan,  Jaddua, there were recorded the heads of fathers, also the priests, in the reign of Darius the Persian.
The sons of Levi, heads of fathers, were written in the book of the chronicles, even until the days of Johanan the son of Eliashib.
the chiefs of the Levites: Hashabiah, Sherebiah,  Jeshua the son of Kadmiel, with their brothers opposite them, to praise and give thanks, according to the commandment of David the man of God, watch next to watch.
Mattaniah,  Bakbukiah, Obadiah, Meshullam, Talmon, Akkub, were porters keeping the watch at the store-houses of the gates.
These were in the days of Joiakim the son of Jeshua, the son of Jozadak,  in the days of Nehemiah the governor,  of Ezra the priest the scribe.
at the dedication of the wall of Jerusalem they sought the Levites out of all their places, to bring them to Jerusalem to keep the dedication with gladness, both with thanksgivings,  with singing, with cymbals, psalteries,  with harps.
the sons of the singers gathered themselves together, both out of the plain round about Jerusalem,  from the villages of the Netophathites,
also from Beth-gilgal,  out of the fields of Geba and Azmaveth; for the singers had built for them villages round about Jerusalem.
the priests and the Levites purified themselves,  they purified the people,  the gates,  the wall.
Then I brought up the rulers of Judah upon the wall,  appointed two great companies that gave thanks and went in procession, one went on the right hand upon the wall toward the dung gate,
after them went Hoshaiah,  half of the rulers of Judah,
Azariah, Ezra,  Meshullam,
Judah,  Benjamin,  Shemaiah,  Jeremiah,
certain of the priests' sons with trumpets: Zechariah the son of Jonathan, the son of Shemaiah, the son of Mattaniah, the son of Micaiah, the son of Zaccur, the son of Asaph,
his brothers, Shemaiah,  Azarel, Milalai, Gilalai, Maai, Nethanel,  Judah, Hanani, with the musical instruments of David the man of God,  Ezra the scribe was ahead of them.
by the fountain gate,  straight before them, they went up by the stairs of the city of David, at the ascent of the wall, above the house of David, even to the water gate eastward.
the other company of those who gave thanks went to meet them,  I after them, with the half of the people, upon the wall, above the tower of the furnaces, even to the broad wall,
above the gate of Ephraim,  by the old gate,  by the fish gate,  the tower of Hananel,  the tower of Hammeah, even to the sheep gate. And they stood still in the gate of the guard.
So stood the two companies of those who gave thanks in the house of God,  I,  the half of the rulers with me,
the priests, Eliakim, Maaseiah, Miniamin, Micaiah, Elioenai, Zechariah,  Hananiah, with trumpets,
Maaseiah,  Shemaiah,  Eleazar,  Uzzi,  Jehohanan,  Malchijah,  Elam,  Ezer. And the singers sang loud, with Jezrahiah their overseer.
they offered great sacrifices that day,  rejoiced, for God had made them rejoice with great joy. And the women also and the children rejoiced, so that the joy of Jerusalem was heard even afar off.
on that day men were appointed over the chambers for the treasures, for the heave offerings, for the first-fruits,  for the tithes, to gather into them, according to the fields of the cities, the portions appointed by the law for the priests and Levites. For Judah rejoiced for the priests and for the Levites who served.
they kept the charge of their God,  the charge of the purification,  also the singers and the porters, according to the commandment of David,  of Solomon his son.
For in the days of David and Asaph of old there was a chief of the singers,  songs of praise and thanksgiving to God.
all Israel in the days of Zerubbabel,  in the days of Nehemiah, gave the portions of the singers and the porters as every day required. And they set apart that which was for the Levites,  the Levites set apart that which was for the sons of Aaron.
On that day they read in the book of Moses in the audience of the people,  in it was found written that an Ammonite and a Moabite should not enter into the assembly of God forever,
because they did not meet the sons of Israel with bread and with water,  hired Balaam against them, to curse them. However our God turned the curse into a blessing.
it came to pass, when they had heard the law, that they separated from Israel all the mixed multitude.
Now before this, Eliashib the priest, who was appointed over the chambers of the house of our God, being allied to Tobiah,
had prepared for him a great chamber, where formerly they laid the meal offerings, the frankincense,  the vessels,  the tithes of the grain, the new wine,  the oil, which were given by commandment to the Levites,  the singers,  the porters,  the heave offerings for the priests.
But in all this time I was not at Jerusalem, for in the thirty-second year of Artaxerxes king of Babylon I went to the king. And after certain days I asked leave of the king,
I came to Jerusalem,  understood the evil that Eliashib had done for Tobiah, in preparing him a chamber in the courts of the house of God.
it grieved me greatly. Therefore I cast forth all the household stuff of Tobiah out of the chamber.
Then I commanded,  they cleansed the chambers. And there I brought again the vessels of the house of God, with the meal offerings and the frankincense.
I perceived that the portions of the Levites had not been given them, so that the Levites and the singers, who did the work, had fled each one to his field.
Then I contended with the rulers,  said, Why is the house of God forsaken? And I gathered them together,  set them in their place.
Then all Judah brought the tithe of the grain and the new wine and the oil to the treasuries.
I made treasurers over the treasuries, Shelemiah the priest,  Zadok the scribe,  of the Levites, Pedaiah,  next to them was Hanan the son of Zaccur, the son of Mattaniah. For they were counted faithful,  their business was to distribute to their brothers.
Remember me, O my God, concerning this,  do not wipe out my good deeds that I have done for the house of my God,  for the observances of it.
In those days I saw in Judah some men treading wine-presses on the sabbath,  bringing in sheaves,  loading donkeys therewith, as also wine, grapes,  figs,  all manner of burdens, which they brought into Jerusalem on the sabbath day. And I testified against them in the day in which they sold foods.
There dwelt men of Tyre also in it who brought in fish,  all manner of wares,  sold on the sabbath to the sons of Judah,  in Jerusalem.
Then I contended with the ranking men of Judah,  said to them, What evil thing is this that ye do,  profane the sabbath day?
Did not your fathers thus,  did not our God bring all this evil upon us,  upon this city? Yet ye bring more wrath upon Israel by profaning the sabbath.
it came to pass that, when the gates of Jerusalem began to be dark before the sabbath, I commanded that the doors should be shut,  commanded that they should not be opened till after the sabbath. And I set some of my servants over the gates that there should be no burden brought in on the sabbath day.
So the merchants and sellers of all kind of wares lodged outside Jerusalem once or twice.
Then I testified against them,  said to them, Why do ye lodge outside the wall? If ye do so again, I will lay hands on you. From that time forth they came no more on the sabbath.
I commanded the Levites that they should purify themselves,  that they should come and keep the gates, to sanctify the sabbath day. Remember to me, O my God, this also,  spare me according to the greatness of thy loving kindness.
In those days also I saw the Jews who had married women of Ashdod, of Ammon,  of Moab.
their sons spoke half in the speech of Ashdod,  could not speak in the Jews' language,  according to the language of each people.
I contended with them,  cursed them,  smote certain of them,  plucked off their hair,  made them swear by God, saying, Ye shall not give your daughters to their sons, nor take their daughters for your sons, or for yourselves.
Did not Solomon king of Israel sin by these things? Yet there was no king like him among many nations,  he was beloved of his God,  God made him king over all Israel. Nevertheless foreign women caused even him to sin.
Shall we then hearken to you to do all this great evil, to trespass against our God in marrying foreign women?
one of the sons of Joiada, the son of Eliashib the high priest, was son-in-law to Sanballat the Horonite. Therefore I chased him from me.
Remember them, O my God, because they have defiled the priesthood,  the covenant of the priesthood,  of the Levites.
Thus I cleansed them from all foreigners,  appointed charges for the priests and for the Levites, each one in his work,
for the wood offering, at times appointed,  for the first-fruits. Remember me, O my God, for good.
Esther
Esth. Now it came to pass in the days of Ahasuerus (this is Ahasuerus who reigned from India even to Ethiopia over a hundred and twenty-seven provinces),
Esth. that in those days, when king Ahasuerus sat on the throne of his kingdom, which was in Shushan the palace,
Esth. in the third year of his reign, he made a feast to all his rulers and his servants, the power of Persia and Media, the ranking men and rulers of the provinces, being before him
Esth. when he showed the riches of his glorious kingdom and the honor of his excellent majesty many days, even a hundred and eighty days.
Esth. And when these days were fulfilled, the king made a feast to all the people who were present in Shushan the palace, both great and small, seven days, in the court of the garden of the king's palace.
Esth. There were hangings of white cloth, of green,  of blue, fastened with cords of fine linen and purple to silver rings and pillars of marble. The couches were of gold and silver, upon a pavement of red and white and yellow and black marble.
Esth. And they gave them drink in vessels of gold (the vessels being diverse one from another),  royal wine in abundance according to the bounty of the king.
Esth. And the drinking was according to the law, none could compel. For so the king had appointed to all the officers of his house, that they should do according to every man's pleasure.
Esth. Also Vashti the queen made a feast for the women in the royal house which belonged to king Ahasuerus.
Esth. On the seventh day, when the heart of the king was merry with wine, he commanded Mehuman, Biztha, Harbona, Bigtha,  Abagtha, Zethar,  Carcas, the seven chamberlains who ministered in the presence of Ahasuerus the king,
Esth. to bring Vashti the queen before the king with the royal crown to show the peoples and the rulers her beauty, for she was fair to look on.
Esth. But the queen Vashti refused to come at the king's commandment by the chamberlains. Therefore the king was very angry,  his fury burned in him.
Esth. Then the king said to the wise men who knew the times (for so was the king's manner toward all who knew law and judgment,
Esth. and next to him were Carshena, Shethar, Admatha, Tarshish, Meres, Marsena,  Memucan, the seven rulers of Persia and Media who saw the king's face,  sat first in the kingdom),
Esth. What shall we do to queen Vashti according to law, because she has not done the bidding of king Ahasuerus by the chamberlains?
Esth. And Memucan answered before the king and the rulers, Vashti the queen has not done wrong only to the king,  also to all the rulers,  to all the peoples that are in all the provinces of king Ahasuerus.
Esth. For this deed of the queen will come abroad to all women, to make their husbands contemptible in their eyes when it shall be reported, King Ahasuerus commanded Vashti the queen to be brought in before him,  she did not come.
Esth. And this day the ladies of Persia and Media who have heard of the deed of the queen will say the like to all the king's rulers. So there will arise much contempt and wrath.
Esth. If it please the king, let there go forth a royal commandment from him,  let it be written among the laws of the Persians and the Medes, that it be not altered, that Vashti come no more before king Ahasuerus,  let the king give her royal estate to another who is better than she.
Esth. And when the king's decree which he shall make shall be published throughout all his kingdom (for it is great), all the wives will give to their husbands honor, both to great and small.
Esth. And the saying pleased the king and the rulers,  the king did according to the word of Memucan.
Esth. For he sent letters into all the king's provinces, into every province according to the writing of it,  to every people after their language, that every man should bear rule in his own house,  should speak according to the language of his people.
Esth. After these things, when the wrath of king Ahasuerus was pacified, he remembered Vashti,  what she had done,  what was decreed against her.
Esth. Then the king's servants who ministered to him said, Let there be fair young virgins sought for the king.
Esth. And let the king appoint officers in all the provinces of his kingdom, that they may gather together all the fair young virgins to Shushan the palace, to the house of the women, to the custody of Hegai the king's chamberlain, keeper of the women. And let their things for purification be given them,
Esth. and let the maiden who pleases the king be queen instead of Vashti. And the thing pleased the king,  he did so.
Esth. There was a certain Jew in Shushan the palace whose name was Mordecai, the son of Jair, the son of Shimei, the son of Kish, a Benjamite,
Esth. who had been carried away from Jerusalem with the captives who had been carried away with Jeconiah king of Judah, whom Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon had carried away.
Esth. And he brought up Hadassah, that is, Esther, his uncle's daughter. For she had neither father nor mother,  the maiden was fair and beautiful. And when her father and mother were dead, Mordecai took her for his own daughter.
Esth. So it came to pass, when the king's commandment and his decree was heard,  when many maidens were gathered together to Shushan the palace to the custody of Hegai, that Esther was taken into the king's house to the custody of Hegai, keeper of the women.
Esth. And the maiden pleased him,  she obtained kindness from him. And he quickly gave her things for purification, with her portions,  the seven maidens who were suitable to be given her out of the king's house. And he removed her and her maidens to the best place of the house of the women.
Esth. Esther had not made known her people nor her kindred, for Mordecai had charged her that she should not make it known.
Esth. And Mordecai walked every day before the court of the women's house to know how Esther did,  what would become of her.
Esth. Now when the turn of every maiden came to go in to king Ahasuerus, after it had been done to her according to the law for the women twelve months (for so were the days of their purifications accomplished, namely, six months with oil of myrrh,  six months with sweet odors and with the things for the purifying of the women),
Esth. then the maiden came to the king in this way: Whatever she desired was given her to go with her out of the house of the women to the king's house.
Esth. In the evening she went,  on the morrow she returned into the second house of the women to the custody of Shaashgaz, the king's chamberlain, who kept the concubines. She came in to the king no more unless the king delighted in her,  she was called by name.
Esth. Now when the turn of Esther, the daughter of Abihail the uncle of Mordecai, who had taken her for his daughter, came to go in to the king, she required nothing but what Hegai the king's chamberlain, the keeper of the women, appointed. And Esther obtained favor in the sight of all those who looked upon her.
Esth. So Esther was taken to king Ahasuerus into his royal house in the tenth month, which is the month Tebeth, in the seventh year of his reign.
Esth. And the king loved Esther above all the women. And she obtained favor and kindness in his sight more than all the virgins, so that he set the royal crown upon her head,  made her queen instead of Vashti.
Esth. Then the king made a great feast to all his rulers and his servants, even Esther's feast,  he made a release to the provinces,  gave gifts according to the bounty of the king.
Esth. And when the virgins were gathered together the second time, then Mordecai was sitting in the king's gate.
Esth. Esther had not yet made known her kindred nor her people, as Mordecai had charged her. For Esther did the commandment of Mordecai, as when she was brought up with him.
Esth. In those days, while Mordecai was sitting in the king's gate, two of the king's chamberlains, Bigthan and Teresh, of those who kept the threshold, were angry,  sought to lay hands on king Ahasuerus.
Esth. And the thing became known to Mordecai, who showed it to Esther the queen,  Esther told the king of it in Mordecai's name.
Esth. And when inquiry was made of the matter,  it was found to be so, they were both hanged on a tree. And it was written in the book of the chronicles before the king.
Esth. After these things king Ahasuerus promoted Haman the son of Hammedatha the Agagite,  advanced him,  set his seat above all the rulers that were with him.
Esth. And all the king's servants, who were in the king's gate, bowed down,  did reverence to Haman, for the king had so commanded concerning him. But Mordecai did not bow down, nor do him reverence.
Esth. Then the king's servants, who were in the king's gate, said to Mordecai, Why do thou transgress the king's commandment?
Esth. Now it came to pass, when they spoke daily to him,  he did not hearken to them, that they told Haman, to see whether Mordecai's matters would stand, for he had told them that he was a Jew.
Esth. And when Haman saw that Mordecai did not bow down, nor do him reverence, then Haman was full of wrath.
Esth. But he disdained to lay hands on Mordecai alone, for they had made known to him the people of Mordecai. Therefore Haman sought to destroy all the Jews that were throughout the whole kingdom of Ahasuerus, even the people of Mordecai.
Esth. In the first month, which is the month Nisan, in the twelfth year of king Ahasuerus, they cast Pur, that is, the lot, before Haman from day to day,  from month to month, to the twelfth month, which is the month Adar.
Esth. And Haman said to king Ahasuerus, There is a certain people scattered abroad and dispersed among the peoples in all the provinces of thy kingdom,  their laws are diverse from those of every people, nor do they keep the king's laws. Therefore it is not for the king's profit to endure them.
Esth. If it please the king, let it be written that they be destroyed. And I will pay ten thousand talents of silver into the hands of those who have the charge of the king's business, to bring it into the king's treasuries.
Esth. And the king took his ring from his hand,  gave it to Haman the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, the Jews' enemy.
Esth. And the king said to Haman, The silver is given to thee, the people also, to do with them as it seems good to thee.
Esth. Then the king's scribes were called in the first month, on the thirteenth day of it. And there was written according to all that Haman commanded to the king's satraps,  to the governors who were over every province,  to the rulers of every people, to every province according to the writing of it,  to every people after their language, in the name of king Ahasuerus it was written. And it was sealed with the king's ring.
Esth. And letters were sent by posts into all the king's provinces, to destroy, to kill,  to cause to perish, all Jews, both young and old, little sons and women, in one day, even upon the thirteenth day of the twelfth month, which is the month Adar,  to take the spoil of them for a prey.
Esth. A copy of the writing that the decree should be given out in every province was published to all the peoples, that they should be ready against that day.
Esth. The posts went forth in haste by the king's commandment,  the decree was given out in Shushan the palace. And the king and Haman sat down to drink,  the city of Shushan was perplexed.
Esth. Now when Mordecai knew all that was done, Mordecai tore his clothes,  put on sackcloth with ashes,  went out into the midst of the city,  cried with a loud and a bitter cry.
Esth. And he came even before the king's gate, for none might enter inside the king's gate clothed with sackcloth.
Esth. And in every province, wherever the king's commandment and his decree came, there was great mourning among the Jews,  fasting,  weeping,  wailing,  many lay in sackcloth and ashes.
Esth. And Esther's maidens and her chamberlains came and told it to her. And the queen was exceedingly grieved. And she sent raiment to clothe Mordecai,  to take his sackcloth from off him,  he did not receive it.
Esth. Then Esther called for Hathach, one of the king's chamberlains whom he had appointed to attend upon her,  charged him to go to Mordecai, to know what this was,  why it was.
Esth. So Hathach went forth to Mordecai to the broad place of the city, which was before the king's gate.
Esth. And Mordecai told him of all that had happened to him,  the exact sum of the money that Haman had promised to pay to the king's treasuries for the Jews to destroy them.
Esth. Also he gave him the copy of the writing of the decree that was given out in Shushan to destroy them, to show it to Esther,  to declare it to her,  to charge her that she should go in to the king to make supplication to him,  to make request before him for her people.
Esth. And Hathach came and told Esther the words of Mordecai.
Esth. Then Esther spoke to Hathach,  gave him a message to Mordecai saying,
Esth. All the king's servants,  the people of the king's provinces, know, that whoever, whether man or woman, shall come to the king into the inner court, who is not called, there is one law for him, that he be put to death, except those to whom the king shall hold out the golden scepter that he may live. But I have not been called to come in to the king these thirty days.
Esth. And they told Esther's words to Mordecai.
Esth. Then Mordecai bade them return answer to Esther, Think not with thyself that thou shall escape in the king's house more than all the Jews.
Esth. For if thou altogether keep quiet at this time, then relief and deliverance will arise to the Jews from another place,  thou and thy father's house will perish. And who knows whether thou have not come to the kingdom for such a time as this?
Esth. Then Esther bade them return answer to Mordecai,
Esth. Go, gather together all the Jews that are present in Shushan,  fast ye for me,  neither eat nor drink three days, night or day. I also and my maidens will fast in like manner. And so I will go in to the king, which is not according to the law. And if I perish, I perish.
Esth. So Mordecai went his way,  did according to all that Esther had commanded him.
Esth. Now it came to pass on the third day, that Esther put on her royal apparel,  stood in the inner court of the king's house, opposite the king's house. And the king sat upon his royal throne in the royal house, opposite the entrance of the house.
Esth. And it was so, when the king saw Esther the queen standing in the court, that she obtained favor in his sight,  the king held out to Esther the golden scepter that was in his hand. So Esther drew near,  touched the top of the scepter.
Esth. Then the king said to her, What will thou, queen Esther? And what is thy request? It shall be given thee even to the half of the kingdom.
Esth. And Esther said, If it seems good to the king, let the king and Haman come this day to the banquet that I have prepared for him.
Esth. Then the king said, Cause Haman to make haste that it may be done as Esther has said. So the king and Haman came to the banquet that Esther had prepared.
Esth. And the king said to Esther at the banquet of wine, What is thy petition? And it shall be granted thee. And what is thy request? Even to the half of the kingdom it shall be performed.
Esth. Then Esther answered,  said, My petition and my request is,
Esth. if I have found favor in the sight of the king,  if it please the king to grant my petition,  to perform my request, let the king and Haman come to the banquet that I shall prepare for them,  I will do tomorrow as the king has said.
Esth. Then Haman went forth that day joyful and glad of heart. But when Haman saw Mordecai in the king's gate, that he did not stand up nor move for him, he was filled with wrath against Mordecai.
Esth. Nevertheless Haman restrained himself,  went home,  he sent and fetched his friends and Zeresh his wife.
Esth. And Haman recounted to them the glory of his riches,  the multitude of his sons,  all the things in which the king had promoted him,  how he had advanced him above the rulers and servants of the king.
Esth. Haman said moreover, Yea, Esther the queen let no man come in with the king to the banquet that she had prepared but myself,  tomorrow also I am invited by her together with the king.
Esth. Yet all this avails me nothing so long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting at the king's gate.
Esth. Then Zeresh his wife and all his friends said to him, Let a gallows be made fifty cubits high,  in the morning speak thou to the king that Mordecai may be hanged on it. Then go thou in merrily with the king to the banquet. And the thing pleased Haman,  he caused the gallows to be made.
Esth. On that night the king could not sleep. And he commanded to bring the book of records of the chronicles,  they were read before the king.
Esth. And it was found written, that Mordecai had told of Bigthana and Teresh, two of the king's chamberlains, of those who kept the threshold, who had sought to lay hands on king Ahasuerus.
Esth. And the king said, What honor and dignity has been bestowed on Mordecai for this? Then the king's servants who ministered to him said, There is nothing done for him.
Esth. And the king said, Who is in the court? Now Haman came into the outward court of the king's house to speak to the king to hang Mordecai on the gallows that he had prepared for him.
Esth. And the king's servants said to him, Behold, Haman stands in the court. And the king said, Let him come in.
Esth. So Haman came in. And the king said to him, What shall be done to the man whom the king delights to honor? Now Haman said in his heart, To whom would the king delight to do honor more than to myself?
Esth. And Haman said to the king, For the man whom the king delights to honor,
Esth. let royal apparel be brought which the king uses to wear,  the horse that the king rides upon,  on the head of which a royal crown is set.
Esth. And let the apparel and the horse be delivered to the hand of one of the king's most noble rulers, that they may array the man therewith whom the king delights to honor,  cause him to ride on horseback through the street of the city,  proclaim before him, Thus shall it be done to the man whom the king delights to honor.
Esth. Then the king said to Haman, Make haste,  take the apparel and the horse, as thou have said,  do even so to Mordecai the Jew, who sits at the king's gate. Let nothing fail of all that thou have spoken.
Esth. Then Haman took the apparel and the horse,  arrayed Mordecai,  caused him to ride through the street of the city,  proclaimed before him, Thus shall it be done to the man whom the king delights to honor.
Esth. And Mordecai came again to the king's gate. But Haman hastened to his house, mourning and having his head covered.
Esth. And Haman recounted to Zeresh his wife and all his friends everything that had befallen him. Then his wise men and Zeresh his wife said to him, If Mordecai, before whom thou have begun to fall, be of the seed of the Jews, thou shall not prevail against him,  shall surely fall before him.
Esth. While they were yet talking with him, the king's chamberlains came,  hastened to bring Haman to the banquet that Esther had prepared.
Esth. So the king and Haman came to banquet with Esther the queen.
Esth. And the king said again to Esther on the second day at the banquet of wine, What is thy petition, queen Esther? And it shall be granted thee. And what is thy request? Even to the half of the kingdom it shall be performed.
Esth. Then Esther the queen answered and said, If I have found favor in thy sight, O king,  if it please the king, let my life be given me at my petition,  my people at my request.
Esth. For we are sold, I and my people, to be destroyed, to be slain,  to perish. But if we had been sold for bondmen and bondwomen, I would have held my peace, although the adversary could not have compensated for the king's damage.
Esth. Then king Ahasuerus spoke and said to Esther the queen, Who is he,  where is he, who dares presume in his heart to do so?
Esth. And Esther said, An adversary and an enemy, even this wicked Haman. Then Haman was afraid before the king and the queen.
Esth. And the king arose in his wrath from the banquet of wine and went into the palace garden. And Haman stood up to make request for his life to Esther the queen, for he saw that there was evil determined against him by the king.
Esth. Then the king returned out of the palace garden into the place of the banquet of wine,  Haman was fallen upon the couch on which Esther was. Then the king said, Will he even force the queen before me in the house? As the word went out of the king's mouth, they covered Haman's face.
Esth. Then Harbonah, one of the chamberlains who were before the king said, Behold also, the gallows fifty cubits high, which Haman has made for Mordecai, who spoke good for the king, stands in the house of Haman. And the king said, Hang him on it.
Esth. So they hanged Haman on the gallows that he had prepared for Mordecai. Then the king's wrath was pacified.
Esth. On that day king Ahasuerus gave the house of Haman the Jews' enemy to Esther the queen. And Mordecai came before the king, for Esther had told what he was to her.
Esth. And the king took off his ring, which he had taken from Haman,  gave it to Mordecai. And Esther set Mordecai over the house of Haman.
Esth. And Esther spoke yet again before the king,  fell down at his feet,  besought him with tears to put away the mischief of Haman the Agagite,  his device that he had devised against the Jews.
Esth. Then the king held out to Esther the golden scepter. So Esther arose,  stood before the king.
Esth. And she said, If it please the king,  if I have found favor in his sight,  the thing seem right before the king,  I be pleasing in his eyes, let it be written to reverse the letters devised by Haman, the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, which he wrote to destroy the Jews that are in all the king's provinces.
Esth. For how can I endure to see the evil that shall come to my people? Or how can I endure to see the destruction of my kindred?
Esth. Then the king Ahasuerus said to Esther the queen and to Mordecai the Jew, Behold, I have given Esther the house of Haman,  him they have hanged upon the gallows, because he laid his hand upon the Jews.
Esth. Write ye also to the Jews, as it pleases you, in the king's name,  seal it with the king's ring, for the writing which is written in the king's name,  sealed with the king's ring, may no man reverse.
Esth. Then the king's scribes were called at that time, in the third month Sivan, on the twenty-third day of it. And it was written according to all that Mordecai commanded to the Jews,  to the satraps,  the governors and rulers of the provinces which are from India to Ethiopia, a hundred twenty-seven provinces, to every province according to the writing of it,  to every people after their language,  to the Jews according to their writing,  according to their language.
Esth. And he wrote the name of king Ahasuerus,  sealed it with the king's ring,  sent letters by post on horseback, riding on swift steeds that were used in the king's service bred of the stud,
Esth. in which the king granted the Jews that were in every city to gather themselves together,  to stand for their life, to destroy, to kill,  to cause to perish, all the power of the people and province who would assault them, their little ones and women,  to take the spoil of them for a prey,
Esth. upon one day in all the provinces of king Ahasuerus, namely, upon the thirteenth day of the twelfth month, which is the month Adar.
Esth. A copy of the writing, that the decree should be given out in every province, was published to all the peoples,  that the Jews should be ready against that day to avenge themselves on their enemies.
Esth. So the posts that rode upon swift steeds that were used in the king's service went out, being hastened and pressed on by the king's commandment,  the decree was given out in Shushan the palace.
Esth. And Mordecai went forth from the presence of the king in royal apparel of blue and white,  with a great crown of gold,  with a robe of fine linen and purple. And the city of Shushan shouted and was glad.
Esth. The Jews had light and gladness,  joy and honor.
Esth. And in every province,  in every city, wherever the king's commandment and his decree came, the Jews had gladness and joy, a feast and a good day. And many from among the peoples of the land became Jews, for the fear of the Jews was fallen upon them.
Esth. Now in the twelfth month, which is the month Adar, on the thirteenth day of the same, when the king's commandment and his decree drew near to be put in execution on the day that the enemies of the Jews hoped to have rule over them (whereas it was turned to the contrary, that the Jews had rule over those who hated them),
Esth. the Jews gathered themselves together in their cities throughout all the provinces of the king Ahasuerus, to lay hand on such as sought their hurt. And no man could withstand them, for the fear of them fell upon all the peoples.
Esth. And all the rulers of the provinces,  the satraps,  the governors,  those who did the king's business, helped the Jews, because the fear of Mordecai fell upon them.
Esth. For Mordecai was great in the king's house,  his fame went forth throughout all the provinces, for the man Mordecai grew greater and greater.
Esth. And the Jews smote all their enemies with the stroke of the sword,  with slaughter and destruction,  did what they would to those who hated them.
Esth. And in Shushan the palace the Jews killed and destroyed five hundred men.
Esth. And they killed Parshandatha,  Dalphon,  Aspatha,
Esth. and Poratha,  Adalia,  Aridatha,
Esth. and Parmashta,  Arisai,  Aridai,  Vaizatha,
Esth. the ten sons of Haman the son of Hammedatha, the Jew's enemy,  they did not lay their hand on the spoil.
Esth. On that day the number of those who were slain in Shushan the palace was brought before the king.
Esth. And the king said to Esther the queen, The Jews have slain and destroyed five hundred men in Shushan the palace,  the ten sons of Haman. What then have they done in the rest of the king's provinces! Now what is thy petition? And it shall be granted thee, or what is thy request further? And it shall be done.
Esth. Then Esther said, If it please the king, let it be granted to the Jews who are in Shushan to do tomorrow also according to this day's decree,  let Haman's ten sons be hanged upon the gallows.
Esth. And the king commanded it so to be done. And a decree was given out in Shushan,  they hanged Haman's ten sons.
Esth. And the Jews who were in Shushan gathered themselves together on the fourteenth day also of the month Adar,  killed three hundred men in Shushan,  they did not lay their hand on the spoil.
Esth. And the other Jews who were in the king's provinces gathered themselves together,  stood for their lives,  had rest from their enemies,  killed seventy-five thousand of those who hated them. But they did not lay their hand on the spoil.
Esth. This was done on the thirteenth day of the month Adar. And on the fourteenth day of the same they rested,  made it a day of feasting and gladness.
Esth. But the Jews who were in Shushan assembled together on the thirteenth day of it,  on the fourteenth of it,  on the fifteenth day of the same they rested,  made it a day of feasting and gladness.
Esth. Therefore the Jews of the villages, who dwell in the unwalled towns, make the fourteenth day of the month Adar a day of gladness and feasting,  a good day,  of sending portions one to another.
Esth. And Mordecai wrote these things,  sent letters to all the Jews who were in all the provinces of the king Ahasuerus, both near and far,
Esth. to enjoin them that they should keep the fourteenth day of the month Adar,  the fifteenth day of the same, yearly,
Esth. as the days in which the Jews had rest from their enemies. And the month which was turned to them from sorrow to gladness,  from mourning into a good day, that they should make them days of feasting and gladness,  of sending portions one to another,  gifts to the poor.
Esth. And the Jews undertook to do as they had begun,  as Mordecai had written to them,
Esth. because Haman the son of Hammedatha, the Agagite, the enemy of all the Jews, had plotted against the Jews to destroy them,  had cast Pur, that is the lot, to consume them,  to destroy them.
Esth. But when the matter came before the king, he commanded by letters that his wicked device, which he had devised against the Jews, should return upon his own head,  that he and his sons should be hanged on the gallows.
Esth. Therefore they called these days Purim, after the name of Pur. Therefore because of all the words of this letter,  of that which they had seen concerning this matter,  that which had come to them,
Esth. the Jews ordained,  took upon them,  upon their seed,  upon all such as joined themselves to them, so that it should not fail, that they would keep these two days according to the writing of it,  according to the appointed time of it, every year.
Esth. And that these days should be remembered and kept throughout every generation, every family, every province,  every city,  that these days of Purim should not fail from among the Jews, nor the remembrance of them perish from their seed.
Esth. Then Esther the queen, the daughter of Abihail,  Mordecai the Jew, wrote with all authority to confirm this second letter of Purim.
Esth. And he sent letters to all the Jews, to the hundred twenty-seven provinces of the kingdom of Ahasuerus, with words of peace and truth,
Esth. to confirm these days of Purim in their appointed times, according as Mordecai the Jew and Esther the queen had enjoined them,  as they had ordained for themselves and for their seed in the matter of the fastings and their cry.
Esth. And the commandment of Esther confirmed these matters of Purim,  it was written in the book.
Esth. And king Ahasuerus laid a tribute upon the land,  upon the isles of the sea.
Esth. And all the acts of his power and of his might,  the full account of the greatness of Mordecai, to what the king advanced him, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Media and Persia?
Esth. For Mordecai the Jew was next to king Ahasuerus,  great among the Jews,  accepted of the multitude of his brothers, seeking the good of his people,  speaking peace to all his seed.
Job
There was a man in the land of Uz whose name was Job,  that man was perfect and upright,  one who feared God,  turned away from evil.
there were born to him seven sons and three daughters.
His substance also was seven thousand sheep,  three thousand camels,  five hundred yoke of oxen,  five hundred she-donkeys,  a very great household, so that this man was the greatest of all the sons of the east.
his sons went and held a feast in the house of each one upon his day,  they sent and called for their three sisters to eat and to drink with them.
it was so, when the days of their feasting were completed, that Job sent and sanctified them,  rose up early in the morning,  offered burnt offerings according to the number of them all. For Job said, It may be that my sons have sinned,  renounced God in their hearts. Thus Job did continually.
Now it came to pass on the day when the sons of God came to present themselves before Jehovah, that Satan also came among them.
Jehovah said to Satan, From where do thou come? Then Satan answered Jehovah,  said, From going to and fro on the earth,  from walking up and down on it.
Jehovah said to Satan, Have thou considered my servant Job? For there is none like him on the earth, a perfect and an upright man, one who fears God,  turns away from evil.
Then Satan answered Jehovah,  said, Does Job fear God for nothing?
Have thou not made a hedge about him,  about his house,  about all that he has, on every side? Thou have blessed the work of his hands,  his substance is increased in the land.
But put forth thy hand now,  touch all that he has,  he will renounce thee to thy face.
Jehovah said to Satan, Behold, all that he has is in thy power, only upon himself do not put forth thy hand. So Satan went forth from the presence of Jehovah.
it fell on a day when his sons and his daughters were eating and drinking wine in their eldest brother's house,
that there came a messenger to Job,  said, The oxen were plowing,  the donkeys feeding beside them,
the Sabeans fell upon them,  took them away. Yea, they have slain the servants with the edge of the sword,  only I alone have escaped to tell thee.
While he was yet speaking, there came also another,  said, The fire of God fell from heaven,  has burned up the sheep and the servants,  consumed them,  only I alone have escaped to tell thee.
While he was yet speaking, there came also another,  said, The Chaldeans made three bands,  fell upon the camels,  have taken them away, yea,  slain the servants with the edge of the sword,  only I alone have escaped to tell thee.
While he was yet speaking, there came also another,  said, Thy sons and thy daughters were eating and drinking wine in their eldest brother's house.
And, behold, there came a great wind from the wilderness,  smote the four corners of the house,  it fell upon the young men,  they are dead,  only I alone have escaped to tell thee.
Then Job arose,  tore his robe,  shaved his head,  fell down upon the ground,  worshiped.
he said, Naked I came out of my mother's womb,  naked I shall return there. Jehovah gave,  Jehovah has taken away, blessed be the name of Jehovah.
In all this Job did not sin, nor foolishly accuse God.
Again it came to pass on the day when the sons of God came to present themselves before Jehovah, that Satan came also among them to present himself before Jehovah.
Jehovah said to Satan, From where did thou come? And Satan answered Jehovah,  said, From going to and fro on the earth,  from walking up and down on it.
Jehovah said to Satan, Have thou considered my servant Job? For there is none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man, one who fears God,  turns away from evil. And he still holds fast his integrity, although thou moved me against him, to destroy him without cause.
Satan answered Jehovah,  said, Skin for skin, yea, all that a man has he will give for his life.
But put forth thy hand now,  touch his bone and his flesh,  he will renounce thee to thy face.
Jehovah said to Satan, Behold, he is in thy hand, only spare his life.
So Satan went forth from the presence of Jehovah,  smote Job with severe boils from the sole of his foot to his crown.
he took a potsherd for him to scrape himself with it,  he sat among the ashes.
Then his wife said to him, Do thou still hold fast thine integrity? Renounce God,  die.
But he said to her, Thou speak as one of the foolish women speaks. What? Shall we receive good at the hand of God,  shall we not receive evil? In all this Job did not sin with his lips.
Now when Job's three friends heard of all this evil that came upon him, they came each one from his own place-Eliphaz the Temanite,  Bildad the Shuhite,  Zophar the Naamathite-and they made an appointment together to come to bemoan him and to comfort him.
when they lifted up their eyes afar off,  did not recognize him, they lifted up their voice,  wept. And each one tore his robe,  sprinkled dust upon their heads toward heaven.
So they sat down with him upon the ground seven days and seven nights. And none spoke a word to him, for they saw that his grief was very great.
After this Job opened his mouth,  cursed his day.
Job answered and said,
Let the day perish in which I was born,  the night which said, There is a man-child conceived.
Let that day be darkness. Let not God from above seek for it, nor let the light shine upon it.
Let darkness and the shadow of death claim it for their own. Let a cloud dwell upon it. Let blackness come upon it.
As for that night, let thick darkness seize upon it. Let it not rejoice among the days of the year. Let it not come into the number of the months.
Lo, let that night be barren. Let no joyful voice come in it.
Let them curse it who curse the day, who are ready to rouse up leviathan.
Let the stars of the twilight of it be dark. Let it look for light,  have none, nor let it behold the eyelids of the morning.
Because it did not shut up the doors of my mother's womb, nor hide trouble from my eyes.
Why did I not die from the womb? Why did I not give up the spirit when my mother bore me?
Why did the knees receive me? Or why the breast, that I should suck?
For now I should have lain down and been quiet. I should have slept. Then I would have been at rest
with kings and counselors of the earth, who built waste places for themselves,
or with rulers who had gold, who filled their houses with silver.
Or I should have been as a hidden untimely birth, as infants that never saw light.
There the wicked cease from troubling,  there the weary are at rest.
There the prisoners are at ease together. They do not hear the voice of the taskmaster.
The small and the great are there. And the servant is free from his master.
Why is light given to him who is in misery,  life to the bitter in soul,
who long for death,  it comes not,  dig for it more than for hid treasures,
who rejoice exceedingly,  are glad when they can find the grave?
Why is light given to a man whose way is hid,  whom God has hedged in?
For my sighing comes before I eat,  my groanings are poured out like water.
For the thing which I fear comes upon me,  that which I am afraid of comes to me.
I am not at ease, nor am I quiet, neither have I rest,  trouble comes.
Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered,  said,
If a man tries to converse with thee, will thou be grieved? But who can withhold himself from speaking?
Behold, thou have instructed many,  thou have strengthened the weak hands.
Thy words have upheld him who was falling,  thou have made firm the feeble knees.
But now it comes to thee,  thou faint. It touches thee,  thou are troubled.
Is not thy fear of God thy confidence, the integrity of thy ways thy hope?
Remember, I pray thee, who ever perished, being innocent? Or where were the upright cut off?
According as I have seen, those who plow iniquity,  sow trouble, reap the same.
By the breath of God they perish,  by the blast of his anger they are consumed.
The roaring of the lion,  the voice of the fierce lion,  the teeth of the young lions, are broken.
The old lion perishes for lack of prey,  the whelps of the lioness are scattered abroad.
Now a thing was secretly brought to me,  my ear received a whisper of it.
In thoughts from the visions of the night, when deep sleep falls on men,
fear came upon me,  trembling, which made all my bones to shake.
Then a spirit passed before my face; the hair of my flesh stood up.
It stood still,  I could not discern the appearance of it. A form was before my eyes. There was silence,  I heard a voice, saying,
Shall mortal man be more just than God? Shall a man be more pure than his maker?
Behold, he puts no trust in his servants,  he charges his agents with folly.
How much more those who dwell in houses of clay, whose foundation is in the dust, who are crushed before the moth!
Between morning and evening they are destroyed. They perish forever without any regarding it.
Is not their tent-cord plucked up within them? They die,  that without wisdom.
Call now, is there any who will answer thee? And to which of the holy ones will thou turn?
For vexation kills the foolish man,  jealousy slays the silly one.
I have seen the foolish taking root,  suddenly I cursed his habitation.
His sons are far from safety,  they are crushed in the gate. Neither is there any to deliver them,
whose harvest the hungry eat up,  takes it even out of the thorns,  the snare gapes for their substance.
For affliction does not come forth from the dust, nor does trouble spring out of the ground,
but man is born to trouble, as the sparks fly upward.
But as for me, I would seek to God. And to God I would commit my cause,
who does great things and unsearchable, marvelous things without number,
who gives rain upon the earth,  sends waters upon the fields,
so that he sets up on high those who are low,  those who mourn are exalted to safety.
He frustrates the devices of the crafty so that their hands cannot perform their enterprise.
He takes the wise in their own craftiness,  the counsel of the cunning is carried headlong.
They meet with darkness in the daytime,  grope at noonday as in the night.
But he saves from the sword of their mouth, even the needy from the hand of the mighty.
So a poor man has hope,  iniquity stops her mouth.
Behold, happy is the man whom God corrects. Therefore do not despise thou the chastening of the Almighty.
For he injures,  binds up. He wounds,  his hands make whole.
He will deliver thee in six troubles. Yea, in seven there shall no evil touch thee.
In famine he will redeem thee from death,  in war from the power of the sword.
Thou shall be hid from the scourge of the tongue. Neither shall thou be afraid of destruction when it comes.
At destruction and dearth thou shall laugh, nor shall thou be afraid of the beasts of the earth.
For thou shall be in league with the stones of the field,  the beasts of the field shall be at peace with thee.
thou shall know that thy tent is in peace,  thou shall visit thy fold,  shall miss nothing.
Thou shall know also that thy seed shall be great,  thine offspring as the grass of the earth.
Thou shall come to thy grave in a full age, like a shock of grain comes in its season.
Lo this, we have searched it, so it is. Hear it,  know thou it for thy good.
Then Job answered and said,
O that my grief were but weighed,  all my calamity laid in the balances!
For now it would be heavier than the sand of the seas. Therefore my words have been rash.
For the arrows of the Almighty are within me, the poison of which my spirit drinks up. The terrors of God set themselves in array against me.
Does the wild donkey bray when he has grass? Or the ox moo over his fodder?
Can that which has no savor be eaten without salt? Or is there any taste in the white of an egg?
My soul refuses to touch them. They are as loathsome food to me.
O that I might have my request,  that God would grant me the thing that I long for!
Even that it would please God to crush me, that he would let loose his hand,  cut me off!
be it still my consolation, yea, let me exult (in pain that does not spare), that I have not denied the words of the Holy One.
What is my strength that I should wait? And what is my end that I should be patient?
Is my strength the strength of stones? Or is my flesh of brass?
Is it not that I have no help in me,  that wisdom is driven quite from me?
To him who is ready to faint, kindness should be from his friend, even to him who forsakes the fear of the Almighty.
My brothers have dealt deceitfully as a brook, as the channel of brooks that pass away,
which are black because of the ice, in which the snow hides itself.
What time they grow warm, they vanish. When it is hot, they are consumed out of their place.
The caravans that travel by the way of them turn aside. They go up into the waste,  perish.
The caravans of Tema looked, the companies of Sheba waited for them.
They were put to shame because they had hoped. They came there,  were confounded.
For now ye are nothing. Ye see a terror,  are afraid.
Did I say, Give to me? Or, Offer a present for me from your substance?
Or, Deliver me from the adversary's hand? Or, Redeem me from the hand of the oppressors?
Teach me,  I will be quiet. And cause me to understand how I have erred.
How forcible are words of uprightness! But your reproof, what does it reprove?
Do ye think to reprove words, seeing that the speeches of a man who is desperate are as wind?
Yea, ye would cast lots upon the fatherless,  make merchandise of your friend.
Now therefore be pleased to look upon me, for truly I shall not lie to your face.
Return, I pray you, let there be no injustice. Yea, return again, my cause is righteous.
Is there injustice on my tongue? Cannot my taste discern mischievous things?
Is there not a warfare to man upon earth? And are not his days like the days of a hireling?
As a servant who earnestly desires the shadow,  as a hireling who looks for his wages,
so I am made to possess months of misery,  wearisome nights are appointed to me.
When I lie down, I say, When shall I arise,  the night be gone? And I am full of tossing to and fro to the dawning of the day.
My flesh is clothed with worms and clods of dust. My skin closes up,  breaks out afresh.
My days are swifter than a weaver's shuttle,  are spent without hope.
O remember that my life is a breath. My eye shall no more see good.
The eye of him who sees me shall behold me no more. Thine eyes shall be upon me,  I shall not be.
As the cloud is consumed and vanishes away, so he who goes down to Sheol shall come up no more.
He shall return no more to his house, nor shall his place know him any more.
Therefore I will not refrain my mouth. I will speak in the anguish of my spirit. I will complain in the bitterness of my soul.
Am I a sea, or a sea-monster, that thou set a watch over me?
When I say, My bed shall comfort me. My couch shall ease my complaint.
Then thou scare me with dreams,  terrify me through visions,
so that my soul chooses strangling and death rather than these my bones.
I loathe my life. I would not live always. Let me alone, for my days are vanity.
What is man, that thou should magnify him,  that thou should set thy mind upon him,
that thou should visit him every morning,  try him every moment?
How long will thou not look away from me, nor let me alone till I swallow down my spittle?
If I have sinned, what do I do to thee, O thou watcher of men? Why have thou set me as a mark for thee, so that I am a burden to myself?
why do thou not pardon my transgression,  take away my iniquity? For now I shall lie down in the dust,  thou will seek me diligently,  I shall not be.
Then Bildad the Shuhite answered,  said,
How long will thou speak these things? And how long shall the words of thy mouth be like a mighty wind?
Does God pervert justice? Or does the Almighty pervert righteousness?
If thy sons have sinned against him,  he has delivered them into the hand of their transgression,
if thou would seek diligently to God,  make thy supplication to the Almighty,
if thou were pure and upright, surely now he would awake for thee,  make the habitation of thy righteousness prosperous.
though thy beginning was small, yet thy latter end would greatly increase.
For inquire, I pray thee, of the former age,  apply thyself to that which their fathers have searched out
for we are but of yesterday,  know nothing, because our days upon earth are a shadow).
Shall they not teach thee,  tell thee,  utter words out of their heart?
Can the rush grow up without mire? Can a reed grow without water?
While it is yet in its greenness,  not cut down, it withers before any other herb.
So are the paths of all who forget God. And the hope of the profane man shall perish,
whose confidence shall break apart,  whose trust is a spider's web.
He shall lean upon his house,  it shall not stand. He shall hold fast thereby,  it shall not endure.
He is green before the sun,  his shoots go forth over his garden.
His roots are wrapped around the stone heap. He beholds the place of stones.
If he is destroyed from his place, then it shall deny him, saying, I have not seen thee.
Behold, this is the joy of his way,  out of the earth others shall spring.
Behold, God will not cast away a perfect man, nor will he uphold the evildoers.
He will yet fill thy mouth with laughter,  thy lips with shouting.
Those who hate thee shall be clothed with shame,  the tent of the wicked shall be no more.
Then Job answered and said,
Of a truth I know that it is so. But how can man be just with God?
If he is pleased to contend with him, he cannot answer him one of a thousand.
He is wise in heart,  mighty in strength. Who has hardened himself against him,  prospered?
He who removes the mountains,  they do not know it when he overturns them in his anger,
who shakes the earth out of its place,  the pillars of it tremble,
who commands the sun,  it does not rise,  seals up the stars,
who alone stretches out the heavens,  treads upon the waves of the sea,
who makes the Bear, Orion,  the Pleiades,  the chambers of the south,
who does great things past finding out, yea, marvelous things without number.
Lo, he goes by me,  I do not see him. He also passes on,  I do not perceive him.
Behold, he seizes; who can hinder him? Who will say to him, What are thou doing?
God will not withdraw his anger. The helpers of Rahab stoop under him.
How much less shall I answer him,  choose out my words to reason with him?
Whom, though I were righteous, yet I would not answer. I would make supplication to my judge.
If I had called,  he had answered me, yet I would not believe that he hearkened to my voice.
For he breaks me with a tempest,  multiplies my wounds without cause.
He will not allow me to take my breath,  fills me with bitterness.
If of strength, lo, he is mighty! And if of justice, who will summon me?
Though I be righteous, my own mouth shall condemn me. Though I be perfect, it shall prove me perverse.
Though I were perfect, I do not regard myself. I despise my life.
It is all one thing. Therefore I say, He destroys the perfect and the wicked.
If the scourge kills suddenly, he will laugh at the trial of the innocent.
The earth is given into the hand of the wicked. He covers the faces of the judges of it. If not he, who then is it?
Now my days are swifter than a runner. They flee away. They see no good,
They are passed away as the swift ships, as the eagle that swoops on the prey.
If I say, I will forget my complaint. I will put off my sad countenance,  be of good cheer,
I am afraid of all my sorrows. I know that thou will not hold me innocent.
I shall be condemned. Why then do I labor in vain?
If I wash myself with snow water,  make my hands ever so clean,
yet thou will plunge me in the ditch,  my own clothes shall abhor me.
For he is not a man, as I am, that I should answer him, that we should come together in judgment.
There is no umpire between us who might lay his hand upon us both.
Let him take his rod away from me,  let not his terror make me afraid.
Then I would speak,  not be afraid of him, for I am not so in myself.
My soul is weary of my life. I will give free reign to my complaint. I will speak in the bitterness of my soul.
I will say to God, Do not condemn me. Show me why thou contend with me.
Is it good to thee that thou should oppress, that thou should despise the work of thy hands,  shine upon the counsel of the wicked?
Have thou eyes of flesh? Or do thou see as man sees?
Are thy days as the days of man, or thy years as man's days,
that thou inquire after my iniquity,  search after my sin,
although thou know that I am not wicked. And there is none that can deliver out of thy hand?
Thy hands have made me and fashioned me together round about, yet thou destroy me.
Remember, I beseech thee, that thou have fashioned me as clay. And will thou bring me into dust again?
Have thou not poured me out as milk,  curdled me like cheese?
Thou have clothed me with skin and flesh,  knit me together with bones and sinews.
Thou have granted me life and loving kindness,  thy visitation has preserved my spirit.
Yet these things thou hid in thy heart. I know that this is with thee.
If I sin, then thou mark me. And thou will not acquit me from my iniquity.
If I be wicked, woe to me. And if I be righteous, yet I shall not lift up my head, being filled with shame,  looking upon my affliction.
if my head exalts itself, thou hunt me as a lion. And again thou show thyself marvelous upon me.
Thou renew thy witnesses against me,  increase thine indignation upon me. Changes and warfare are with me.
Why then have thou brought me forth out of the womb? I would have given up the spirit,  no eye had seen me.
I should have been as though I had not been. I should have been carried from the womb to the grave.
Are not my days few? Cease then,  let me alone, that I may take comfort a little
before I go where I shall not return, to the land of darkness and of the shadow of death,
the land dark as midnight, of the shadow of death, without any order,  where the light is as midnight.
Then Zophar the Naamathite answered,  said,
Should not the multitude of words be answered? And should a man full of talk be justified?
Should thy boastings make men hold their peace? And when thou mock, shall no man make thee ashamed?
For thou say, My doctrine is pure,  I am clean in thine eyes.
But O that God would speak,  open his lips against thee,
that he would show thee the secrets of wisdom! For he is manifold in understanding. Know therefore that God exacts of thee less than thine iniquity deserves.
Can thou find out God by searching? Can thou find out the Almighty to perfection?
It is high as heaven; what can thou do? Deeper than Sheol; what can thou know?
The measure of it is longer than the earth,  broader than the sea.
If he passes through,  shuts up,  all to judgment, then who can hinder him?
For he knows false men. He also sees iniquity. Will he not then consider it?
But vain man is void of understanding. Yea, man is born as a wild donkey's colt.
If thou set thy heart aright,  stretch out thy hands toward him,
if iniquity is in thy hand, put it far away,  let not unrighteousness dwell in thy tents.
Surely then thou shall lift up thy face without spot. Yea, thou shall be steadfast,  shall not fear.
For thou shall forget thy misery. Thou shall remember it as waters that are passed away.
thy life shall be clearer than the noonday. Though there be darkness, it shall be as the morning.
thou shall be secure, because there is hope. Yea, thou shall search about thee,  shall take thy rest in safety.
Also thou shall lie down,  none shall make thee afraid. Yea, many shall correspond with thee.
But the eyes of the wicked shall fail,  they shall have no way to flee. And their hope shall be the giving up of the spirit.
Then Job answered and said,
No doubt but ye are the people,  wisdom shall die with you.
But I have understanding as well as you; I am not inferior to you. Yes, who does not know such things as these?
I am as a man who is a laughing-stock to his neighbor. I who called upon God,  he answered. The just, the perfect man is a laughing-stock.
In the thought of him who is at ease there is contempt for calamity. It is ready for those whose foot slips.
The tents of robbers prosper,  those who provoke God are secure. Into whose hand God brings abundantly.
But ask now the beasts,  they shall teach thee,  the birds of the heavens,  they shall tell thee.
Or speak to the earth,  it shall teach thee,  the fishes of the sea shall declare to thee.
Who does not know in all these, that the hand of Jehovah has wrought this,
in whose hand is the soul of every living thing,  the breath of all mankind?
Does not the ear try words, even as the palate tastes its food?
With aged men is wisdom,  in length of days understanding.
With God is wisdom and might. He has counsel and understanding.
Behold, he breaks down,  it cannot be built again. He shuts up a man,  there can be no opening.
Behold, he withholds the waters,  they dry up. Again, he sends them out,  they overturn the earth.
With him is strength and wisdom. The deceived and the deceiver are his.
He leads counselors away stripped,  he makes judges fools.
He loosens the bond of kings,  he binds their loins with a belt.
He leads priests away stripped,  overthrows the mighty.
He removes the speech of the trustworthy,  takes away the understanding of the elders.
He pours contempt upon rulers,  weakens the strength of the strong.
He uncovers deep things out of darkness,  brings out to light the shadow of death.
He increases the nations,  he destroys them. He enlarges the nations,  he leads them captive.
He takes away understanding from the chiefs of the people of the earth,  causes them to wander in a wilderness where there is no way.
They grope in the dark without light,  he makes them to stagger like a drunken man.
Lo, my eye has seen all this. My ear has heard and understood it.
What ye know, I also know; I am not inferior to you.
Surely I would speak to the Almighty,  I desire to reason with God.
But ye are forgers of lies. Ye are all physicians of no value.
O that ye would altogether be silent! And it would be your wisdom.
Hear now my reasoning,  hearken to the pleadings of my lips.
Will ye speak unrighteously for God,  talk deceitfully for him?
Will ye show partiality to him? Will ye contend for God?
Is it good that he should search you out? Or as deceiving a man, will ye deceive him?
He will surely reprove you if ye secretly show partiality.
Shall not his majesty make you afraid,  his dread fall upon you?
Your memorable sayings are proverbs of ashes. Your defenses are defenses of clay.
Be quiet. Let me alone that I may speak,  let come on me what will.
Why should I take my flesh in my teeth,  put my life in my hand?
Behold, he will kill me; I have no hope. Nevertheless I will maintain my ways before him.
This also shall be my salvation, that a profane man shall not come before him.
Hear diligently my speech,  let my declaration be in your ears.
Behold now, I have set my case in order. I know that I am righteous.
Who is he who will contend with me? For then I would keep silent and give up the spirit.
Only do not do two things to me, then I will not hide myself from thy face:
Withdraw thy hand far from me,  do not let thy dread make me afraid.
Then call thou,  I will answer, or let me speak,  answer thou me.
How many are my iniquities and sins? Make me to know my transgression and my sin.
Why do thou hide thy face,  reckon me for thine enemy?
Will thou harass a driven leaf? And will thou pursue the dry stubble?
For thou write bitter things against me,  make me to inherit the iniquities of my youth.
Thou also put my feet in the stocks,  mark all my paths. Thou set a bound to the soles of my feet.
Though I am like a rotten thing that decays, like a garment that is moth-eaten.
Man, who is born of a woman, is of few days,  full of trouble.
He comes forth like a flower,  is cut down. He too flees as a shadow,  does not continue.
do thou open thine eyes upon such a one,  bring me into judgment with thee?
Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? Not one.
Seeing his days are determined, the number of his months is with thee,  thou have appointed his bounds that he cannot pass,
look away from him, that he may rest, till he shall accomplish, as a hireling, his day.
For there is hope of a tree, if it is cut down, that it will sprout again,  that the tender branch of it will not cease.
Though the root of it grows old in the earth,  the trunk of it dies in the ground,
yet through the scent of water it will bud,  put forth boughs like a plant.
But man dies,  is laid low. Yea, man gives up the spirit,  where is he?
As the waters fail from the sea,  the river wastes away and dries up,
so man lies down and does not rise. Till the heavens be no more, they shall not awake, nor be roused out of their sleep.
O that thou would hide me in Sheol, that thou would keep me secret, until thy wrath be past, that thou would appoint for me a set time,  remember me!
If a man dies, shall he live again? All the days of my warfare I would wait till my release should come.
Thou would call,  I would answer thee. Thou would have a desire to the work of thy hands.
But now thou number my steps. Do thou not watch over my sin?
My transgression is sealed up in a bag,  thou fasten up my iniquity.
But the falling mountain comes to nothing,  the rock is removed out of its place.
The waters wear the stones. The overflowings of it wash away the dust of the earth. So thou destroy the hope of man.
Thou prevail forever against him,  he passes. Thou change his countenance,  send him away.
His sons come to honor,  he does not know it,  they are brought low,  he does not perceive it of them.
But his flesh upon him has pain,  his soul within him mourns.
Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered,  said,
Should a wise man make answer with vain knowledge,  fill himself with the east wind?
Should he reason with unprofitable talk, or with speeches with which he can do no good?
Yea, thou do away with fear,  hinder devotion before God.
For thine iniquity teaches thy mouth. And thou choose the tongue of the crafty.
Thine own mouth condemns thee,  not I. Yes, thine own lips testify against thee.
Are thou the first man who was born? Or were thou brought forth before the hills?
Have thou heard the secret counsel of God? And do thou limit wisdom to thyself?
What do thou know, that we do not know? What do thou understand, which is not in us?
With us are both the gray-headed and the very aged men, much older than thy father.
Are the consolations of God too small for thee, even the word that is gentle toward thee?
Why does thy heart carry thee away? And why do thine eyes flash,
that against God thou turn thy spirit,  let words go out of thy mouth?
What is man, that he should be clean? And he who is born of a woman, that he should be righteous?
Behold, he puts no trust in his holy ones. Yea, the heavens are not clean in his sight.
How much less one who is abominable and corrupt, a man who drinks iniquity like water!
I will show thee. Hear thou me,  that which I have seen I will declare,
which wise men have told from their fathers,  have not hid it,
to whom alone the land was given,  no stranger passed among them:
The wicked man travails with pain all his days, even the number of years that are laid up for the oppressor.
A sound of terrors is in his ears. In prosperity the destroyer shall come upon him.
He does not believe that he shall return out of darkness. And he is awaited by the sword.
He wanders abroad for bread, saying, Where is it? He knows that the day of darkness is ready at his hand.
Distress and anguish make him afraid. They prevail against him as a king ready to the battle.
Because he has stretched out his hand against God,  behaves himself proudly against the Almighty.
He runs upon him with a stiff neck, with the thick studs of his bucklers,
because he has covered his face with his fatness,  gathered fat upon his loins.
he has dwelt in desolate cities, in houses which no man inhabited, which were ready to become heaps.
He shall not be rich, neither shall his substance continue, neither shall their possessions be extended on the earth.
He shall not depart out of darkness. The flame shall dry up his branches,  by the breath of God's mouth he shall go away.
Let him not trust in vanity, deceiving himself. For vanity shall be his recompense.
It shall be accomplished before his time,  his branch shall not be green.
He shall shake off his unripe grape as the vine,  shall cast off his flower as the olive tree.
For the company of the hypocrites shall be barren,  fire shall consume the tents of bribery.
They conceive mischief,  bring forth iniquity,  their heart prepares deceit.
Then Job answered,  said,
I have heard many such things. Miserable comforters are ye all.
Shall vain words have an end? Or what provokes thee that thou answer?
I also could speak as ye do, if your soul were in my soul's stead. I could join words together against you,  shake my head at you.
But I would strengthen you with my mouth,  the solace of my lips would assuage your grief.
Though I speak, my grief is not assuaged,  though I forbear, what am I eased?
But now he has made me weary. Thou have made desolate all my company.
thou have laid fast hold on me, which is a witness against me. And my leanness rises up against me; it testifies to my face.
He has torn me in his wrath,  persecuted me. He has gnashed upon me with his teeth. My adversary sharpens his eyes upon me.
They have gaped upon me with their mouth. They have smitten me upon the cheek reproachfully. They gather themselves together against me.
God delivers me to the perverse,  casts me into the hands of the wicked.
I was at ease,  he broke me apart. Yea, he has taken me by the neck,  dashed me to pieces. He has also set me up for his mark.
His archers encompass me round about. He splits my reins apart,  does not spare. He pours out my gall upon the ground.
He breaks me with breach upon breach. He runs upon me like a giant.
I have sewed sackcloth upon my skin,  have laid my horn in the dust.
My face is red with weeping,  the shadow of death is on my eyelids,
although there is no violence in my hands,  my prayer is pure.
O earth, do not cover thou my blood,  let my cry have no resting place.
Even now, behold, my witness is in heaven,  he who vouches for me is on high.
My friends scoff at me. My eye pours out tears to God
that he would maintain the right of a man with God,  of a son of man with his neighbor!
For when a few years are come, I shall go the way where I shall not return.
My spirit is consumed, my days are extinct, the grave is ready for me.
Surely there are mockers with me,  my eye dwells upon their provocation.
Give now a pledge, be surety for me with thyself. Who is there that will strike hands with me?
For thou have hid their heart from understanding. Therefore thou shall not exalt them.
He who denounces his friends for a prey, even the eyes of his sons shall fail.
But he has made me a byword of the people,  they spit in my face.
My eye also is dim because of sorrow,  all my members are as a shadow.
Upright men shall be astonished at this,  the innocent shall stir himself up against the profane.
Yet the righteous shall hold on his way. And he who has clean hands shall grow stronger and stronger.
But as for you all, come on now again,  I shall not find a wise man among you.
My days are past. My purposes are broken off, even the thoughts of my heart.
They change the night into day. The light, they say, is near to the darkness.
If I look for Sheol as my house, if I have spread my couch in the darkness,
if I have said to corruption, Thou are my father, to the worm, My mother,  my sister,
where then is my hope? And as for my hope, who shall see it?
It shall go down to the bars of Sheol when once there is rest in the dust.
Then Bildad the Shuhite answered,  said,
How long will ye hunt for words? Consider,  afterwards we will speak.
Why are we counted as beasts,  have become unclean in your eyes?
Thou who tear thyself in thine anger, shall the earth be forsaken for thee? Or shall the rock be removed out of its place?
Yea, the light of the wicked shall be put out,  the spark of his fire shall not shine.
The light shall be dark in his tent,  his lamp above him shall be put out.
The steps of his strength shall be restricted,  his own counsel shall cast him down.
For he is cast into a net by his own feet,  he walks upon the toils.
A trap shall take him by the heel. A snare shall lay hold on him.
A noose is hid for him in the ground,  a trap for him in the way.
Terrors shall make him afraid on every side,  shall chase him at his heels.
His strength shall be weakened by hunger,  calamity shall be ready at his side.
The members of his body shall be devoured. The firstborn of death shall devour his body-parts.
He shall be rooted out of his tent where he trusts,  he shall be brought to the king of terrors.
There shall dwell in his tent that which is none of his. Brimstone shall be scattered upon his habitation.
His roots shall be dried up beneath,  above shall his branch be cut off.
His remembrance shall perish from the earth,  he shall have no name in the street.
He shall be driven from light into darkness,  chased out of the world.
He shall have neither son nor son's son among his people, nor any remaining where he sojourned.
Those who come after shall be astonished at his day, as those who went before were frightened.
Surely such are the dwellings of the unrighteous,  this is the place of him who does not know God.
Then Job answered,  said,
How long will ye vex my soul,  break me in pieces with words?
These ten times ye have reproached me. Ye are not ashamed that ye deal hardly with me.
be it indeed that I have erred, my error remains with myself.
If indeed ye will magnify yourselves against me,  plead against me my reproach,
know now that God has subverted me,  has encompassed me with his net.
Behold, I cry out of wrong,  I am not heard. I cry for help,  there is no justice.
He has walled up my way that I cannot pass,  has set darkness in my paths.
He has stripped me of my glory,  taken the crown from my head.
He has broken me down on every side,  I am gone. And he has plucked up my hope like a tree.
He has also kindled his wrath against me. And he considers me to him as his adversaries.
His troops come on together,  cast up their way against me,  encamp round about my tent.
He has put my brothers far from me,  my acquaintances are wholly estranged from me.
My kinsfolk have failed,  my familiar friends have forgotten me.
Those who dwell in my house,  my maids, reckon me for a stranger; I am an alien in their sight.
I call to my servant,  he gives me no answer. I entreat him with my mouth.
My breath is strange to my wife,  my supplication to the sons of my own mother.
Even young children despise me. If I arise, they speak against me.
All my familiar friends abhor me,  those whom I loved are turned against me.
My bone cleaves to my skin and to my flesh,  I have escaped with the skin of my teeth.
Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O ye my friends, for the hand of God has touched me.
Why do ye persecute me as God,  are not satisfied with my flesh?
O that my words were now written! O that they were inscribed in a book,
that they were engraved in the rock forever with an iron pen and lead!
But as for me I know that my Redeemer lives,  at last he will stand up upon the earth.
after my skin, this body, is destroyed, then outside my flesh I shall see God,
whom I, even I, shall see on my side,  my eyes shall behold,  not as a stranger. My heart is consumed within me.
If ye say, How we will persecute him! And that the root of the matter is found in me,
be ye afraid of the sword. For wrath brings the punishments of the sword, that ye may know there is a judgment.
Then Zophar the Naamathite answered,  said,
Therefore my thoughts cause me to answer, even because of my haste that is in me.
I have heard the reproof which puts me to shame,  the spirit of my understanding answers me.
Know thou this of old time, since man was placed upon earth,
that the triumphing of the wicked is short,  the joy of the profane but for a moment?
Though his height mounts up to the heavens,  his head reaches to the clouds,
yet he shall perish forever like his own dung. Those who have seen him shall say, Where is he?
He shall fly away as a dream,  shall not be found. Yea, he shall be chased away as a vision of the night.
The eye which saw him shall see him no more, neither shall his place any more behold him.
His sons shall seek the favor of the poor,  his hands shall give back his wealth.
His bones are full of his youth,  it shall lie down with him in the dust.
Though wickedness be sweet in his mouth, though he hide it under his tongue,
though he spares it,  will not let it go,  keep it still within his mouth,
yet his food in his bowels is turned. It is the gall of asps within him.
He has swallowed down riches,  he shall vomit them up again. God will cast them out of his belly.
He shall suck the poison of asps. The viper's tongue shall kill him.
He shall not look upon the rivers, the flowing streams of honey and butter.
That which he labored for shall he restore,  shall not swallow it down. According to the substance that he has gotten, he shall not rejoice.
For he has oppressed and forsaken the poor. He has violently taken away a house,  he shall not build it up.
Because he knew no quietness within him, he shall not save any of that in which he delights.
There was nothing left that he did not devour, therefore his prosperity shall not endure.
In the fullness of his sufficiency he shall be in straits. The hand of everyone who is in misery shall come upon him.
When he is about to fill his belly, God will cast the fierceness of his wrath upon him,  will rain it upon him while he is eating.
He shall flee from the iron weapon,  the bow of brass shall strike him through.
He draws it forth,  it comes out of his body, yea, the glittering point comes out of his gall. Terrors are upon him.
All darkness is laid up for his treasures. A fire not blown shall devour him. It shall consume that which is left in his tent.
The heavens shall reveal his iniquity,  the earth shall rise up against him.
The increase of his house shall depart, flowed away in the day of his wrath.
This is the portion of a wicked man from God,  the heritage appointed to him by God.
Then Job answered,  said,
Hear diligently my speech, And let this be your consolations.
Allow me,  I also will speak,  after I have spoken, mock on.
As for me, is my complaint to man? And why should I not be impatient?
Mark me,  be astonished,  lay your hand upon your mouth.
Even when I remember, I am troubled,  horror takes hold on my flesh.
Why do the wicked live, become old, yea, grow mighty in power?
Their seed is established with them in their sight,  their offspring before their eyes.
Their houses are safe from fear, nor is the rod of God upon them.
Their bull breeds,  does not fail. Their cow brings forth safely,  does not miscarry.
They send forth their little ones like a flock,  their children dance.
They sing to the timbrel and harp,  rejoice at the sound of the pipe.
They spend their days in prosperity,  in a moment they go down to Sheol.
they say to God, Depart from us, for we do not desire the knowledge of thy ways.
What is the Almighty that we should serve him? And what profit should we have, if we pray to him?
Lo, is their prosperity not in their hand. (The counsel of the wicked is far from me.)
How often is it that the lamp of the profane is put out, that their calamity comes upon them, that God distributes sorrows in his anger,
that they are as stubble before the wind,  as chaff that the storm carries away?
Ye say, God lays up his iniquity for his sons. Let him recompense it to himself that he may know it.
Let his own eyes see his destruction,  let him drink of the wrath of the Almighty.
For what does he care for his house after him when the number of his months is cut off?
Shall any teach God knowledge, seeing he judges those who are high?
One man dies in his full strength, being wholly at ease and quiet.
His pails are full of milk,  the marrow of his bones is moistened.
another man dies in bitterness of soul,  never tastes of good.
They lie down alike in the dust,  the worm covers them.
Behold, I know your thoughts,  the devices with which ye would wrong me.
For ye say, Where is the house of the prince? And where is the tent in which the wicked dwelt?
Have ye not asked wayfaring men? And do ye not know their evidences,
that the evil man is reserved to the day of calamity? That they are led forth to the day of wrath?
Who shall declare his way to his face? And who shall repay him what he has done?
Yet he shall be borne to the grave,  men shall keep watch over the tomb.
The clods of the valley shall be sweet to him. And all men shall draw after him, as there were innumerable before him.
How then ye comfort me in vain, seeing in your answers there remains falsehood?
Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered,  said,
Can a man be profitable to God? Surely he who is wise is profitable to himself.
Is it any pleasure to the Almighty that thou are righteous? Or is it gain to him that thou make thy ways perfect?
Is it for thy fear of him that he reproves thee, that he enters with thee into judgment?
Is not thy wickedness great? Neither is there any end to thine iniquities.
For thou have taken pledges from thy brother for nothing,  stripped the naked of their clothing.
Thou have not given water to the weary to drink,  thou have withheld bread from the hungry.
But as for the mighty man, he had the land. And the honorable man, he dwelt in it.
Thou have sent widows away empty,  the arms of the fatherless have been broken.
Therefore snares are round about thee,  sudden fear troubles thee,
or darkness, so that thou cannot see,  abundance of waters cover thee.
Is not God in the height of heaven? And behold the height of the stars, how high they are!
thou say, What does God know? Can he judge through the thick darkness?
Thick clouds are a covering to him, so that he does not see,  he walks on the vault of heaven.
Will thou keep the old way which wicked men have trodden?
Who were snatched away before their time, whose foundation was poured out as a stream,
who said to God, Depart from us, , What can the Almighty do for us?
Yet he filled their houses with good things. But the counsel of the wicked is far from me.
The righteous see it,  are glad. And the innocent laugh them to scorn,
Saying, Surely those who rose up against us are cut off,  the remnant of them, the fire has consumed.
Acquaint now thyself with him,  be at peace. By this good shall come to thee.
Receive, I pray thee, the law from his mouth,  lay up his words in thy heart.
If thou return to the Almighty, thou shall be built up, thou put away unrighteousness far from thy tents.
Then thou shall lay up gold as dust,  the gold of Ophir as the stones of the brooks.
Yea, the Almighty will be thy treasure,  precious silver to thee.
For then shall thou delight thyself in the Almighty,  shall lift up thy face to God.
Thou shall make thy prayer to him,  he will hear thee,  thou shall pay thy vows.
Thou shall also decree a thing,  it shall be established to thee. And light shall shine upon thy ways.
When they cast thee down, thou shall say, There is lifting up,  he will save the humble man.
He will deliver even him who is not innocent. Yea, he shall be delivered through the cleanness of thy hands.
Then Job answered and said,
Even today my complaint is rebellious. My stroke is heavier than my groaning.
O that I knew where I might find him, that I might come even to his seat!
I would set my case in order before him,  fill my mouth with arguments.
I would know the words which he would answer me,  understand what he would say to me.
Would he contend with me in the greatness of his power? No,  he would give heed to me.
There the upright might reason with him. So I should be delivered forever from my judge.
Behold, I go forward,  he is not there,  backward,  I cannot perceive him,
on the left hand, when he works,  I cannot behold him. He hides himself on the right hand, that I cannot see him.
But he knows the way that I take. When he has tried me, I shall come forth as gold.
My foot has held fast to his steps. I have kept his way,  not turned aside.
I have not gone back from the commandment of his lips, I have treasured up the words of his mouth more than my necessary food.
But he is in one mind,  who can turn him? And what his soul desires, even that he does.
For he performs that which is appointed for me. And many such things are with him.
Therefore I am terrified at his presence. When I consider, I am afraid of him.
For God has made my heart faint,  the Almighty has terrified me,
because I was not cut off before the darkness, nor did he cover the thick darkness from my face.
Why are times not laid up by the Almighty? And why do those who know him not see his days?
There are men who remove the landmarks. They take away flocks violently,  feed them.
They drive away the donkey of the fatherless. They take the widow's ox for a pledge.
They turn the needy out of the way. The poor of the earth all hide themselves.
Behold, as wild donkeys in the desert, they go forth to their work, seeking diligently for food. The wilderness yields them bread for their sons.
They cut their provender in the field,  they glean the vintage of the wicked.
They lie all night naked without clothing,  have no covering in the cold.
They are wet with the showers of the mountains,  embrace the rock for want of a shelter.
There are men who pluck the fatherless from the breast,  take a pledge of the poor,
so that they go about naked without clothing,  being hungry they carry the sheaves.
They make oil within the walls of these men. They tread their winepresses,  suffer thirst.
From out of the populous city men groan,  the soul of the wounded cries out. Yet God does not regard the folly.
These are of those who rebel against the light. They do not know the ways of it, nor abide in the paths of it.
The murderer rises with the light. He kills the poor and needy. And in the night he is as a thief.
The eye also of the adulterer waits for the twilight, saying, No eye shall see me. And he disguises his face.
In the dark they dig through houses. They shut themselves up in the daytime. They do not know the light.
For the morning is to all of them as thick darkness. For they know the terrors of the thick darkness.
Swiftly they pass away upon the face of the waters. Their portion is cursed in the earth. They do not turn into the way of the vineyards.
Drought and heat consume the snow waters,  Sheol those who have sinned.
The womb shall forget him. The worm shall feed sweetly on him. He shall be no more remembered. And unrighteousness shall be broken as a tree.
He devours the barren who do not bear,  does no good to the widow.
Yet God preserves the mighty by his power. He rises up who has no assurance of life.
God gives them to be in security,  they rest in it. And his eyes are upon their ways.
They are exalted. Yet a little while,  they are gone. Yea, they are brought low. They are taken out of the way as all others,  are cut off as the tops of the ears of grain.
if it be not so now, who will prove me a liar,  make my speech worth nothing?
Then Bildad the Shuhite answered,  said,
Dominion and fear are with him. He makes peace in his high places.
Is there any number of his armies? And upon whom does his light not arise?
How then can man be just with God? Or how can he be clean who is born of a woman?
Behold, even the moon has no brightness. And the stars are not pure in his sight.
How much less man, who is a worm! And the son of man, who is a worm!
Then Job answered,  said,
How thou have helped him who is without power! How thou have saved the arm that has no strength!
How thou have counseled him who has no wisdom,  plentifully declared sound knowledge!
To whom have thou uttered words? And whose spirit came forth from thee?
Those who are deceased tremble beneath the waters and the inhabitants of it.
Sheol is naked before God,  Abaddon has no covering.
He stretches out the north over empty space,  hangs the earth upon nothing.
He binds up the waters in his thick clouds,  the cloud is not burst under them.
He encloses the face of his throne,  spreads his cloud upon it.
He has described a boundary upon the face of the waters, to the confines of light and darkness.
The pillars of heaven tremble and are astonished at his rebuke.
He stirs up the sea with his power,  by his understanding he smites through Rahab.
By his Spirit the heavens are garnished. His hand has pierced the swift serpent.
Lo, these are but the periphery of his ways. And how small a whisper do we hear of him! But the thunder of his power who can understand?
Job again took up his discourse,  said,
As God lives, who has taken away my right,  the Almighty, who has vexed my soul.
For my life is yet whole in me. And the spirit of God is in my nostrils.)
Surely my lips shall not speak unrighteousness, nor shall my tongue utter deceit.
Far be it from me that I should justify you. Till I die I will not put away my integrity from me.
I hold fast my righteousness,  will not let it go. My heart shall not reproach me so long as I live.
Let my enemy be as the wicked,  let him who rises up against me be as the unrighteous.
For what is the hope of the profane, though he gets him gain, when God takes away his soul?
Will God hear his cry when trouble comes upon him?
Will he delight himself in the Almighty,  call upon God at all times?
I will teach you concerning the hand of God. That which is with the Almighty I will not conceal.
Behold, all ye yourselves have seen it. Why then have ye become altogether vain?
This is the portion of a wicked man with God,  the heritage of oppressors, which they receive from the Almighty.
If his sons be multiplied, it is for the sword. And his offspring shall not be satisfied with bread.
Those who remain of him shall be buried in death,  his widows shall make no lamentation.
Though he heaps up silver as the dust,  prepares raiment as the clay,
he may prepare it,  the just shall put it on,  the innocent shall divide the silver.
He builds his house as the moth,  as a booth which the keeper makes.
He lies down rich,  he shall not be gathered to his fathers. He opens his eyes,  he is not.
Terrors overtake him like waters. A tempest steals him away in the night.
The east wind carries him away,  he departs,  it sweeps him out of his place.
For God shall hurl at him,  not spare. He would gladly flee out of his hand.
Men shall clap their hands at him,  shall hiss him out of his place.
Surely there is a mine for silver,  a place for gold which they refine.
Iron is taken out of the earth,  copper is molten out of the stone.
Man sets an end to darkness,  searches out to the furthest bound the stones of obscurity and of thick darkness.
He breaks open a shaft away from where men sojourn, paths forgotten by the foot. They hang afar from men; they swing to and fro.
As for the earth, out of it comes bread,  underneath it is turned up as it were by fire.
The stones of it are the place of sapphires,  it has dust of gold.
No bird of prey knows that path, nor has the falcon's eye seen it.
The proud beasts have not trodden it, nor has the fierce lion passed thereby.
He puts forth his hand upon the flinty rock. He overturns the mountains by the roots.
He cuts out channels among the rocks,  his eye sees every precious thing.
He binds the streams that they not trickle. And the thing that is hid he brings forth to light.
But where shall wisdom be found? And where is the place of understanding?
Man does not know the price of it, nor is it found in the land of the living.
The deep says, It is not in me. And the sea says, It is not with me.
It cannot be gotten for gold, nor shall silver be weighed for the price of it.
It cannot be valued with the gold of Ophir, with the precious onyx, or the sapphire.
Gold and glass cannot equal it, nor shall it be exchanged for jewels of fine gold.
No mention shall be made of coral or of crystal. Yea, the price of wisdom is above rubies.
The topaz of Ethiopia shall not equal it, nor shall it be valued with pure gold.
Where then does wisdom come from? And where is the place of understanding?
Since it is hid from the eyes of all living,  kept closed from the birds of the heavens.
Destruction and Death say, We have heard a rumor of it with our ears.
God understands the way of it,  he knows the place of it.
For he looks to the ends of the earth,  sees under the whole heaven,
to make a weight for the wind. Yea, he distributes the waters by measure.
When he made a decree for the rain,  a way for the lightning of the thunder,
then he saw it,  declared it. He established it, yea,  searched it out.
to man he said, Behold, the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom,  to depart from evil is understanding.
Job again took up his discourse,  said,
O that I were as in the months of old, as in the days when God watched over me,
when his lamp shone upon my head,  by his light I walked through darkness,
as I was in the ripeness of my days, when the friendship of God was upon my tent,
when the Almighty was yet with me,  my sons were about me,
when my steps were washed with butter,  the rock poured out streams of oil to me,
when I went forth to the gate to the city, when I prepared my seat in the street.
The young men saw me and hid themselves,  the aged rose up and stood.
The rulers refrained from talking,  laid their hand on their mouth.
The voice of the ranking men was hushed,  their tongue stuck to the roof of their mouth.
For when the ear heard me, then it blessed me,  when the eye saw me, it gave witness to me.
Because I delivered the poor who cried, also the fatherless who had none to help him.
The blessing of him who was ready to perish came upon me,  I caused the widow's heart to sing for joy.
I put on righteousness,  it clothed me. My justice was as a robe and a diadem.
I was eyes to the blind,  I was feet to the lame.
I was a father to the needy,  I searched out the case of him whom I did not know.
I broke the jaws of the unrighteous,  plucked the prey out of his teeth.
Then I said, I shall die in my nest,  I shall multiply my days as the sand.
My root is spread out to the waters,  the dew lays all night upon my branch.
My glory is fresh in me,  my bow is renewed in my hand.
To me men gave ear,  waited,  kept silence for my counsel.
After my words they spoke not again,  my speech distilled upon them.
they waited for me as for the rain. And they opened their mouth wide as for the latter rain.
I smiled on them when they had no confidence,  they did not cast down the light of my countenance.
I chose out their way,  sat as chief,  dwelt as a king in the army, as a man who comforts the mourners.
But now those who are younger than I have me in derision, whose fathers I disdained to set with the dogs of my flock.
Yea, the strength of their hands, to what should it profit me? Men in whom ripe age is perished.
They are gaunt with want and famine. They gnaw the dry ground in the gloom of waste and desolation.
They pluck mallows by the bushes,  the roots of the juniper are their food.
They are driven forth from the midst of men. They cry out after them as after a thief,
so that they dwell in frightful valleys, in holes of the earth and of the rocks.
Among the bushes they bray, under the nettles they are gathered together.
They are sons of fools, yea, sons of base men. They were scourged out of the land.
now I have become their song, Yea, I am a byword to them.
They abhor me. They stand aloof from me,  do not spare to spit in my face.
For he has loosed his cord,  afflicted me. And they have cast off the bridle before me.
Upon my right hand rise the rabble. They thrust aside my feet,  they cast up against me their ways of destruction.
They mar my path. They set forward my calamity, even men who have no helper.
As through a wide breach they come. In the midst of the ruin they roll themselves upon me.
Terrors are turned upon me. They chase my honor as the wind,  my welfare is passed away as a cloud.
now my soul is poured out within me. Days of affliction have taken hold upon me.
In the night season my bones are pierced in me,  the pains that gnaw me take no rest.
By the great force my garment is disfigured. It binds me about as the collar of my coat.
He has cast me into the mire,  I have become like dust and ashes.
I cry to thee,  thou do not answer me. I stand up,  thou gaze at me.
Thou have turned to be cruel to me. With the might of thy hand thou persecute me.
Thou lift me up to the wind. Thou cause me to ride upon it,  thou disintegrate me in the storm.
For I know that thou will bring me to death,  to the house appointed for all living.
However does not a man stretch out the hand in his fall? Or in his calamity therefore cry for help?
Did I not weep for him who was in trouble? Was not my soul grieved for the needy?
When I looked for good, then evil came. And when I waited for light, there came darkness.
My heart is troubled,  does not rest. Days of affliction have come upon me.
I go mourning without the sun. I stand up in the assembly,  cry for help.
I am a brother to jackals,  a companion to ostriches.
My skin is black,  falls from me. And my bones are burned with heat.
Therefore my harp has turned to mourning,  my pipe into the voice of those who weep.
I made a covenant with my eyes. How then should I look upon a virgin?
For what is the portion from God above,  the heritage from the Almighty on high?
Is it not calamity to the unrighteous,  disaster to the workers of iniquity?
Does he not see my ways,  number all my steps?
If I have walked with falsehood,  my foot has hastened to deceit
let me be weighed in an even balance, that God may know my integrity);
if my step has turned out of the way,  my heart walked after my eyes,  if any spot has clung to my hands,
then let me sow,  let another eat, yea, let the produce of my field be rooted out.
If my heart has been enticed to a woman,  I have laid wait at my neighbor's door,
then let my wife grind to another,  let others bow down upon her.
For that is a heinous crime, yea, it is an iniquity to be punished by the judges.
For it is a fire that consumes to destruction,  would root out all my increase.
If I have despised the case of my man-servant or of my maid-servant when they contended with me,
what then shall I do when God rises up? And when he visits, what shall I answer him?
Did not he who made me in the womb make him? And did not one fashion us in the womb?
If I have withheld the poor from their desire, or have caused the eyes of the widow to fail,
or have eaten my morsel alone,  the fatherless has not eaten of it
no, from my youth he grew up with me as with a father,  her I have guided from my mother's womb);
if I have seen any perish for lack of clothing, or that the needy had no covering;
if his loins have not blessed me,  if he has not been warmed with the fleece of my sheep;
if I have lifted up my hand against the fatherless, because I saw my help in the gate,
then let my shoulder fall from the shoulder-blade,  my arm be broken from the bone.
For calamity from God is a terror to me,  I can do nothing because of his majesty.
If I have made gold my hope,  have said to the fine gold, Thou are my confidence;
if I have rejoiced because my wealth was great,  because my hand had gotten much;
if I have beheld the sun when it shone, or the moon walking in brightness,
my heart has been secretly enticed,  my mouth has kissed my hand
this also is an iniquity to be punished by the judges, for I would have denied the God that is above);
if I have rejoiced at the destruction of him who hated me, or lifted up myself when evil found him
yea, I have not allowed my mouth to sin by asking his life with a curse);
if the men of my tent have not said, Who can find one who has not been filled with his food?
the sojourner has not lodged in the street,  I have opened my doors to the traveler);
if like Adam I have covered my transgressions by hiding my iniquity in my bosom
because I feared the great multitude,  the contempt of families terrified me so that I kept silence,  did not go out of the door-
O that I had someone to hear me (Lo, here is my signature, let the Almighty answer me),  that I had the indictment which my adversary has written!
Surely I would carry it upon my shoulder. I would bind it to me as a crown.
I would declare to him the number of my steps. I would go near to him as a prince.
If my land cries out against me,  the furrows of it weep together;
if I have eaten the fruits of it without money, or have caused the owners of it to lose their lives,
let thistles grow instead of wheat,  cockle instead of barley. The words of Job are ended.
So these three men ceased to answer Job because he was righteous in his own eyes.
Then the anger of Elihu the son of Barachel the Buzite, of the family of Ram, was kindled. His anger was kindled against Job because he justified himself rather than God.
His anger was also kindled against his three friends because they had found no answer,  yet had condemned Job.
Now Elihu had waited to speak to Job, because they were older than he.
when Elihu saw that there was no answer in the mouth of these three men, his anger was kindled.
Elihu the son of Barachel the Buzite answered and said, I am young,  ye are very old. Therefore I held back,  dared not show you my opinion.
I said, Days should speak,  multitude of years should teach wisdom.
But there is a spirit in man,  the breath of the Almighty gives them understanding.
It is not the great who are wise, nor the aged who understand justice.
Therefore I said, Hearken to me, I also will show my opinion.
Behold, I waited for your words, I listened for your reasonings, while ye searched out what to say.
Yea, I attended to you. And, behold, there was none who convinced Job, or who answered his words among you.
Beware lest ye say, We have found wisdom. God may vanquish him, not man.
For he has not directed his words against me. Neither will I answer him with your speeches.
They are amazed, they answer no more. They have not a word to say.
shall I wait because they do not speak, because they stand still,  answer no more?
I also will answer my part. I also will show my opinion,
for I am full of words. The spirit within me compels me.
Behold, my breast is as wine which has no vent. Like new wine-skins it is ready to burst.
I will speak that I may be refreshed. I will open my lips and answer.
Let me not, I pray you, respect any man's person. Neither will I give flattering titles to any man.
For I know not to give flattering titles, else my maker would soon take me away.
However, Job, I pray thee, hear my speech,  hearken to all my words.
Behold now, I have opened my mouth. My tongue has spoken in my mouth.
My words shall utter the uprightness of my heart,  that which my lips know they shall speak sincerely.
The Spirit of God has made me,  the breath of the Almighty gives me life.
If thou can, answer thou me. Set thy words in order before me. Stand forth.
Behold, I am toward God even as thou are. I also am formed out of the clay.
Behold, my terror shall not make thee afraid, nor shall my pressure be heavy upon thee.
Surely thou have spoken in my hearing,  I have heard the voice of thy words, saying,
I am clean, without transgression. I am innocent, neither is there iniquity in me.
Thou say, Behold, he finds occasions against me. He counts me for his enemy.
He puts my feet in the stocks. He marks all my paths.
Behold, I will answer thee. In this thou are not just, for God is greater than man.
Why do thou strive against him because he does not give account of any of his matters?
For God speaks once, yea twice, though man does not regard it.
In a dream, in a vision of the night, when deep sleep falls upon men, in slumberings upon the bed.
Then he opens the ears of men,  seals their instruction
that he may withdraw man from his purpose,  hide pride from man.
He keeps back his soul from the pit,  his life from perishing by the sword.
He also is chastened with pain upon his bed,  with continual strife in his bones,
so that his life abhors bread,  his soul dainty food.
His flesh is consumed away that it cannot be seen. And his bones that were not seen stick out.
Yea, his soul draws near to the pit,  his life to the destroyers.
If there be with him an agent, an interpreter, one among a thousand, to show to man what is right for him,
then God is gracious to him,  says, Deliver him from going down to the pit; I have found a ransom.
His flesh shall be fresher than a child's. He returns to the days of his youth.
He prays to God,  he is favorable to him, so that he sees his face with joy,  he restores to man his righteousness.
He sings before men,  says, I have sinned,  perverted that which was right,  it did not profit me.
He has redeemed my soul from going into the pit,  my life shall behold the light.
Lo, all these things God works twice, yea thrice, with a man,
to bring back his soul from the pit, that he may be enlightened with the light of the living.
Mark well, O Job, hearken to me. Keep silent,  I will speak.
If thou have anything to say, answer me. Speak, for I desire to justify thee.
If not, hearken thou to me. Keep silent,  I will teach thee.
Moreover Elihu answered,  said,
Hear my words, ye wise men,  give ear to me, ye who have knowledge.
For the ear tries words as the palate tastes food.
Let us choose for us that which is right. Let us know among ourselves what is good.
For Job has said, I am righteous,  God has taken away my right.
Notwithstanding my right I am accounted a liar. My wound is incurable, though I am without transgression.
What man is like Job, who drinks up scorning like water,
saying, I have not sinned, nor committed unrighteousness, nor had fellowship with workers of iniquity to go with the profane.
For thou should not say, There shall be no visitation to a man, whereas visitation is to him from the Lord.
Therefore hearken to me, ye men of understanding. Far be it from me to sin before the Lord,  pervert righteousness before the Almighty.
For the work of a man he will render to him,  cause every man to find according to his ways.
Yea, certainly God will not do wrong. Neither will the Almighty pervert justice.
Who gave him a charge over the earth? Or who has disposed the whole world?
If he sets his heart upon himself, if he gathers his spirit and his breath to himself,
all flesh shall perish together,  man shall turn again to dust.
If now thou be understanding, hear this. Hearken to the voice of words.
Behold thou him who hates lawlessness,  who destroys evil men, who is forever righteousness,
him who says to a king, Thou are vile, to ranking men, Ye are wicked,
who does not respect the persons of rulers, nor regards the rich more than the poor. For they all are the work of his hands.
In a moment they die, even at midnight. The people are shaken and pass away,  the mighty are taken away without hand.
For his eyes are upon the ways of a man,  he sees all his goings.
There is no darkness, nor thick gloom where the workers of iniquity may hide themselves.
For he needs no further to consider a man, that he should go before God in judgment.
He breaks in pieces mighty men in ways past finding out,  sets others in their stead.
Therefore he takes knowledge of their works,  he overturns them in the night, so that they are destroyed.
He strikes them as wicked men in the open sight of others
because they turned aside from following him,  would not have regard in any of his ways,
so that they caused the cry of the poor to come to him,  he heard the cry of the afflicted.
When he gives quietness, who then can condemn? And when he hides his face, who then can behold him? It is the same whether to a nation, or to a man,
that the profane man not reign, that there be none to ensnare the people.
For has any said to God, I have borne chastisement, I will not offend any more.
Teach thou me that which I do not see. If I have done iniquity, I will do it no more?
Shall his recompense be as thou desire, that thou refuse it? For thou must choose,  not I. Therefore speak what thou know.
Men of understanding will say to me, yes, every wise man who hears me,
Job speaks without knowledge,  his words are without wisdom.
But surely not. Learn thou Job not to still give an answer like the foolish,
so that we may not add to our sins,  lawlessness will be reckoned against us, speaking many words before the Lord.
Moreover Elihu answered,  said,
What is this thou think in judgment? Who are thou that thou said, I am righteousness before the Lord?
That thou said, What advantage will it be to thee? And, What profit shall I have more than if I had sinned?
I will answer thee,  thy companions with thee.
Look to the heavens,  see. And behold the skies, which are higher than thou.
If thou have sinned, what do thou effect against him? And if thy transgressions be multiplied, what do thou to him?
If thou be righteous, what do thou give him? Or what does he receive of thy hand?
Thy wickedness is a man as thou are,  thy righteousness is a son of man.
Because of the multitude of oppressions they cry out. They cry for help because of the arm of the mighty.
But none says, Where is God my maker who gives songs in the night,
who teaches us more than the beasts of the earth,  makes us wiser than the birds of the heavens?
There they cry,  none gives answer, because of the pride of evil men.
Surely God will not hear an empty cry, nor will the Almighty regard it.
How much less when thou say thou do not behold him. The case is before him,  thou wait for him!
But now, because he has not visited in his anger, nor does he greatly regard folly,
so Job opens his mouth in vanity. He multiplies words without knowledge.
Elihu also proceeded,  said,
Allow me a little,  I will show thee. For I have yet somewhat to say on God's behalf.
I will fetch my knowledge from afar,  will ascribe righteousness to my maker.
For truly my words are not false.) He who is perfect in knowledge is with thee.
Behold, God is mighty,  does not despise. He is mighty in strength of understanding.
He does not preserve the life of the wicked,  gives to the afflicted their right.
He does not withdraw his eyes from the righteous,  he sets them forever with kings upon the throne,  they are exalted.
if they be bound in fetters,  be taken in the cords of afflictions,
then he shows them their work,  their transgressions, that they have behaved themselves proudly.
He also opens their ear to instruction,  commands that they return from iniquity.
If they hearken and serve him, they shall spend their days in prosperity,  their years in pleasures.
But if they do not hearken, they shall perish by the sword,  they shall die without knowledge.
But those who are godless in heart lay up anger. They do not cry for help when he binds them.
They die in youth,  their life perishes among the unclean.
He delivers the afflicted by their affliction,  opens their ear in oppression.
Yea, he would have allured thee out of distress into a broad place, where there is no confinement,  that which is set on thy table would be full of fatness.
But thou have fulfilled the judgment of the wicked. Judgment and justice take hold,
there shall be wrath upon the impious because of the ungodliness of bribes which the unrighteous receive.
Will thy cry not avail in distress, or all the forces of strength?
Do not desire the night, when peoples are cut off in their place.
Take heed. Do not turn to iniquity, for thou have fixed on this because of affliction.
Behold, God does loftily in his power. Who is a teacher like him?
Who has enjoined him his way? Or who can say, Thou have wrought unrighteousness?
Remember that thou magnify his work, of which men have sung.
All men have looked on it. Man beholds it afar off.
Behold, God is great,  we do not know him. The number of his years is unsearchable.
For he draws up the drops of water, which distil in rain from his vapor,
which the skies pour down and drop upon man abundantly.
Yea, can any understand the spreadings of the clouds, the thunderings of his pavilion?
Behold, he spreads his light around him,  he covers the bottom of the sea.
For by these he judges the peoples. He gives food in abundance.
He covers his hands with the lightning,  gives it a command that it strike the mark.
The noise of it tells concerning him. The cattle also concerning the storm that comes up.
Yea, at this my heart trembles,  is moved out of its place.
Hear, O, hear the noise of his voice,  the sound that goes out of his mouth.
He sends it forth under the whole heaven,  his lightning to the ends of the earth.
After it a voice roars. He thunders with the voice of his majesty,  he does not restrain the lightnings when his voice is heard.
God thunders marvelously with his voice. He does great things which we cannot comprehend.
For he says to the snow, Fall thou on the earth, likewise to the shower of rain,  to the showers of his mighty rain.
He seals up the hand of every man, that all men whom he has made may know it.
Then the beasts go into coverts,  remain in their dens.
Out of the chamber of the south comes the storm,  cold out of the north.
By the breath of God ice is given,  the breadth of the waters is narrowed.
Yea, he loads the thick cloud with moisture. He spreads abroad the cloud of his lightning,
it is turned round about by his guidance, that they may do whatever he commands them upon the face of the habitable world.
He causes it to come, whether it be for correction, or for his land, or for loving kindness.
Hearken to this, O Job. Stand still,  consider the wondrous works of God.
Do thou know how God lays his charge upon them,  causes the lightning of his cloud to shine?
Do thou know the balancing of the clouds, the wondrous works of him who is perfect in knowledge?
How thy garments are warm when the earth is still because of the south wind?
Can thou with him spread out the sky, which is strong as a molten mirror?
Teach us what we shall say to him. We cannot set in array because of darkness.
Shall it be told him that I would speak? Or should a man wish that he were swallowed up?
now men do not see the light which is bright in the skies,  the wind passes,  clears them.
Out of the north comes golden splendor. God has upon him awesome majesty.
O the Almighty, we cannot find him out. He is excellent in power. And in justice and abundant righteousness he will not afflict.
Men therefore fear him. He does not regard any who are wise of heart.
Then Jehovah answered Job out of the whirlwind,  said,
Who is this that darkens counsel by words without knowledge?
Gird up now thy loins like a man, for I will demand of thee,  declare thou to me.
Where were thou when I laid the foundations of the earth? Declare, if thou have understanding.
Who determined the measures of it, if thou know? Or who stretched the line upon it?
Upon what were the foundations of it fastened? Or who laid the cornerstone of it
when the morning stars sang together,  all the sons of God shouted for joy?
Or who shut up the sea with doors when it broke forth, like it had issued out of the womb,
when I made clouds the garment of it,  thick darkness a swaddling-band for it,
marked out for it my bound,  set bars and doors,
said, This far thou shall come,  no farther,  here thy proud waves shall be stayed?
Have thou commanded the morning since thy days began,  caused the dayspring to know its place
that it might take hold of the ends of the earth,  the wicked be shaken out of it?
It is changed as clay under the seal,  all things stand forth as a garment.
from the wicked their light is withheld,  the high arm is broken.
Have thou entered into the springs of the sea? Or have thou walked in the recesses of the deep?
Have the gates of death been revealed to thee? Or have thou seen the gates of the shadow of death?
Have thou comprehended the earth in its breadth? Declare, if thou know it all.
Where is the way to the dwelling of light? And as for darkness, where is the place of it
that thou should take it to the bound of it,  that thou should discern the paths to the house of it?
Thou know, for thou were born then,  the number of thy days is great!
Have thou entered the treasuries of the snow, or have thou seen the treasures of the hail,
which I have reserved against the time of trouble, against the day of battle and war?
By what way is the light divided, or the east wind scattered upon the earth?
Who has cleft a channel for the water flood, or the way for the lightning of the thunder,
to cause it to rain on a land where no man is, on the wilderness, in which there is no man,
to satisfy the waste and desolate ground,  to cause the tender grass to spring forth?
Has the rain a father? Or who has begotten the drops of dew?
Out of whose womb came the ice? And the hoary frost of heaven, who has engendered it?
The waters hide themselves and become like stone,  the face of the deep is frozen.
Can thou bind the cluster of the Pleiades, or loose the bands of Orion?
Can thou lead forth the Mazzaroth in their season? Or can thou guide the Bear with her train?
Do thou know the ordinances of the heavens? Can thou establish the dominion of it on the earth?
Can thou lift up thy voice to the clouds, that abundance of waters may cover thee?
Can thou send forth lightnings, that they may go,  say to thee, Here we are?
Who has put wisdom in the inward parts? Or who has given understanding to the mind?
Who can number the clouds by wisdom? Or who can pour out the bottles of heaven
when the dust runs into a mass,  the clods cleave fast together?
Can thou hunt the prey for the lioness, or satisfy the appetite of the young lions
when they couch in their dens,  abide in the covert to lie in wait?
Who provides for the raven his prey when his young ones cry to God,  wander for lack of food?
Do thou know the time when the wild goats of the rock bring forth? Or can thou mark when the hinds do calve?
Can thou number the months that they fulfill? Or do thou know the time when they bring forth?
They bow themselves. They bring forth their young. They cast out their pains.
Their young ones become strong. They grow up in the open field. They go forth,  return not again.
Who has sent out the wild donkey free? Or who has loosed the bonds of the swift donkey
whose home I have made the wilderness,  the salt land his dwelling-place?
He scorns the tumult of the city, neither does he hear the shoutings of the driver.
The range of the mountains is his pasture,  he searches after every green thing.
Will the wild-ox be content to serve thee? Or will he abide by thy crib?
Can thou bind the wild-ox with his band in the furrow? Or will he harrow the valleys after thee?
Will thou trust him because his strength is great? Or will thou leave to him thy labor?
Will thou confide in him that he will bring home thy seed,  gather the grain of thy threshing-floor?
The wings of the ostrich wave proudly,  are they the pinions and plumage of love?
For she leaves her eggs on the ground,  warms them in the dust.
she forgets that the foot may crush them, or that the wild beast may trample them.
She deals hardly with her young ones, as if they were not hers. Though her labor be in vain, she is without fear,
because God has deprived her of wisdom, nor has he imparted understanding to her.
The time she lifts up herself on high she scorns the horse and his rider.
Have thou given the horse his might? Have thou clothed his neck with the quivering mane?
Have thou made him to leap as a locust? The glory of his snorting is awesome.
He paws in the valley,  rejoices in his strength. He goes out to meet the armed men.
He mocks at fear,  is not dismayed. Neither does he turn back from the sword.
The quiver rattles against him, the flashing spear and the javelin.
He swallows the ground with fierceness and rage, nor does he believe that it is the voice of the trumpet.
As often as the trumpet sounds he says, Aha! And he smells the battle afar off, the thunder of the captains,  the shouting.
Is it by thy wisdom that the hawk soars,  stretches her wings toward the south?
Is it at thy command that the eagle mounts up,  makes her nest on high?
She dwells on the cliff,  makes her home upon the point of the cliff and the stronghold.
From there she spies out the prey. Her eyes behold it afar off.
Her young ones also suck up blood. And where the slain are, there is she.
Moreover Jehovah answered Job,  said,
Shall he who quibbles contend with the Almighty? He who argues with God, let him answer it.
Then Job answered Jehovah,  said,
Behold, I am of small account. What shall I answer thee? I lay my hand upon my mouth.
I have spoken once,  I will not answer, yes, twice,  I will proceed no further.
Then Jehovah answered Job out of the whirlwind,  said,
Gird up thy loins now like a man. I will demand of thee,  declare thou to me.
Will thou even annul my judgment? Will thou condemn me, that thou may be justified?
Or have thou an arm like God? And can thou thunder with a voice like him?
Deck thyself now with excellency and dignity,  array thyself with honor and majesty.
Pour forth the overflowings of thine anger,  look upon everyone who is proud,  abase him.
Look on everyone who is proud,  bring him low,  tread down the wicked where they stand.
Hide them in the dust together. Bind their faces in the hidden place.
Then I will also confess of thee that thine own right hand can save thee.
Behold now behemoth, which I made as well as thee. He eats grass as an ox.
Lo now, his strength is in his loins,  his force is in the muscles of his belly.
He moves his tail like a cedar. The sinews of his thighs are knit together.
His bones are as tubes of brass. His limbs are like bars of iron.
He is a beginning of the ways of God. He who made him gives him his sword.
Surely the mountains bring him forth food, where all the beasts of the field play.
He lies under the lotus trees, in the covert of the reed,  the fen.
The lotus trees cover him with their shade. The willows of the brook encompass him about.
Behold, if a river overflows, he does not tremble. He is confident though a Jordan swell even to his mouth.
Shall any take him when he is on the watch, or pierce through his nose with a snare?
Can thou draw out leviathan with a fishhook, or press down his tongue with a cord?
Can thou put a rope into his nose, or pierce his jaw through with a hook?
Will he make many supplications to thee? Or will he speak soft words to thee?
Will he make a covenant with thee, that thou should take him for a servant forever?
Will thou play with him as with a bird? Or will thou bind him for thy maidens?
Will the bands make traffic of him? Will they part him among the merchants?
Can thou fill his skin with barbed irons, or his head with fish-spears?
Lay thy hand upon him. Remember the battle,  do so no more.
Behold, the hope of him is in vain. Will not a man be cast down even at the sight of him?
None is so fierce that he dare stir him up. Who then is he who can stand before me?
Who has first given to me, that I should repay him? Under the whole heaven is mine.
I will not keep silence concerning his limbs, nor his mighty strength, nor his goodly frame.
Who can strip off his outer garment? Who shall come within his jaws?
Who can open the doors of his face? Round about his teeth is terror.
His strong scales are his pride, shut up together like a close seal.
One is so near to another that no air can come between them.
They are joined one to another. They stick together, so that they cannot be parted.
His sneezings flash forth light,  his eyes are like the eyelids of the morning.
Out of his mouth go burning torches,  sparks of fire leap forth.
Out of his nostrils a smoke goes, as of a boiling pot and burning rushes.
His breath kindles coals,  a flame goes forth from his mouth.
In his neck abides strength,  terror dances before him.
The flakes of his flesh are joined together. They are firm upon him. They cannot be moved.
His heart is as firm as a stone, Yea, firm as the nether millstone.
When he raises himself up the mighty are afraid. Because of consternation they are beside themselves.
If a man lays at him with the sword it cannot avail, nor the spear, the dart, nor the pointed shaft.
He counts iron as straw,  brass as rotten wood.
The arrow cannot make him flee. Sling-stones are turned into stubble with him.
Clubs are counted as stubble. He laughs at the rushing of the javelin.
His underparts are like sharp potsherds. He spreads out as a threshing-wagon upon the mire.
He makes the deep to boil like a pot. He makes the sea like a pot of ointment.
He makes a path to shine after him. A man would think the deep to be hoary.
Upon earth there is not his like who is made without fear.
He beholds everything that is high. He is king over all the sons of pride.
Then Job answered Jehovah,  said,
I know that thou can do all things,  that no purpose of thine can be restrained.
Who is this who hides counsel without knowledge? Therefore I have uttered that which I did not understand, things too wonderful for me, which I did not know.
Hear, I beseech thee,  I will speak, I will ask of thee,  declare thou to me.
I had heard of thee by the hearing of the ear,  now my eye sees thee.
Therefore I abhor myself,  repent in dust and ashes.
it was so, that, after Jehovah had spoken these words to Job, Jehovah said to Eliphaz the Temanite, My wrath is kindled against thee,  against thy two friends. For ye have not spoken of me the thing that is right, as my servant Job has.
Now therefore, take to you seven bullocks and seven rams. And go to my servant Job,  offer up for yourselves a burnt offering. And my servant Job shall pray for you, for him I will accept, that I not deal with you after your folly. For ye have not spoken of me the thing that is right, as my servant Job has.
So Eliphaz the Temanite and Bildad the Shuhite and Zophar the Naamathite went and did according as Jehovah commanded them,  Jehovah accepted Job.
Jehovah turned back the captivity of Job when he prayed for his friends. And Jehovah gave Job twice as much as he had before.
Then there came to him all his brothers,  all his sisters,  all those who had been of his acquaintance before,  ate bread with him in his house. And they bemoaned him,  comforted him concerning all the evil that Jehovah had brought upon him. Each man also gave him a piece of money,  each one a ring of gold.
So Jehovah blessed the latter end of Job more than his beginning. And he had fourteen thousand sheep,  six thousand camels,  a thousand yoke of oxen,  a thousand she-donkeys.
He had also seven sons and three daughters.
he called the name of the first, Jemimah,  the name of the second, Keziah,  the name of the third, Keren-happuch.
in all the land were no women found so fair as the daughters of Job. And their father gave them inheritance among their brothers.
after this Job lived a hundred and forty years,  saw his sons,  his sons' sons, even four generations.
So Job died, being old and full of days.
Psalms
Ps. Blessed is the man who walks not in the counsel of the wicked, nor stands in the way of sinners, nor sits in the seat of scoffers,
Ps. but his delight is in the law of Jehovah,  on his law he meditates day and night.
Ps. And he shall be like a tree planted by the streams of water, that brings forth its fruit in its season, whose leaf also does not wither. And whatever he does shall prosper.
Ps. The wicked are not so,  are like the chaff which the wind drives away.
Ps. Therefore the wicked shall not stand in the judgment, nor sinners in the congregation of the righteous.
Ps. For Jehovah knows the way of the righteous,  the way of the wicked shall perish.
Ps. Why do the nations rage,  the peoples meditate vain things?
Ps. The kings of the earth set themselves,  the rulers take counsel together, against Jehovah,  against his anointed, saying,
Ps. Let us break their bonds apart,  cast away their cords from us.
Ps. He who sits in the heavens will laugh. The Lord will have them in derision.
Ps. Then he will speak to them in his wrath,  vex them in his great displeasure.
Ps. Yet I have set my king upon my holy hill of Zion.
Ps. I will tell of the decree. Jehovah said to me, Thou are my Son, this day I have begotten thee.
Ps. Ask of me,  I will give thee the nations for thine inheritance,  the outermost parts of the earth for thy possession.
Ps. Thou shall break them with a rod of iron, thou shall dash them in pieces like a potter's vessel.
Ps. Now therefore be wise, O ye kings. Be instructed, ye judges of the earth.
Ps. Serve Jehovah with fear,  rejoice with trembling.
Ps. Kiss the Son, lest he be angry,  ye perish in the way, for his wrath will soon be kindled. Blessed are all those who take refuge in him.
Ps. Jehovah, how my adversaries are increased! Many are those who rise up against me.
Ps. Many there are who say of my soul, There is no help for him in God. Selah.
Ps. But thou, O Jehovah, are a shield about me, my glory and he who lifts up of my head.
Ps. I cry to Jehovah with my voice,  he answers me out of his holy hill. Selah.
Ps. I laid down and slept. I awoke, for Jehovah sustains me.
Ps. I will not be afraid of ten thousands of the people who have set themselves against me round about.
Ps. Arise, O Jehovah. Save me, O my God. For thou have smitten all my enemies upon the cheek bone. Thou have broken the teeth of the wicked.
Ps. Salvation belongs to Jehovah. Thy blessing be upon thy people. Selah.
Ps. Answer me when I call, O God of my righteousness. Thou have enlarged me in distress. Have mercy upon me,  hear my prayer.
Ps. O ye sons of men, how long shall my glory be turned into dishonor? Will ye love vanity,  seek after falsehood? Selah.
Ps. But know that Jehovah has set apart for himself him who is holy. Jehovah will hear when I call to him.
Ps. Stand in awe,  sin not. Commune with your own heart upon your bed,  be still. Selah.
Ps. Offer the sacrifices of righteousness,  put your trust in Jehovah.
Ps. Many there are who say, Who will show us good? Jehovah, lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us.
Ps. Thou have put gladness in my heart more than when their grain and their new wine are increased.
Ps. In peace I will both lie down and sleep, for thou, Jehovah, alone make me dwell in safety.
Ps. Give ear to my words, O Jehovah, Consider my meditation.
Ps. Hearken to the voice of my cry, my King,  my God, for to thee do I pray.
Ps. O Jehovah, in the morning thou shall hear my voice. In the morning I will direct to thee,  will keep watch.
Ps. For thou are not a God who has pleasure in wickedness. Evil shall not sojourn with thee.
Ps. The arrogant shall not stand in thy sight. Thou hate all workers of iniquity.
Ps. Thou will destroy those who speak lies. Jehovah abhors the blood-thirsty and deceitful man.
Ps. But as for me, in the abundance of thy loving kindness I will come into thy house. In thy fear I will worship toward thy holy temple.
Ps. Lead me, O Jehovah, in thy righteousness because of my enemies. Make thy way straight before my face.
Ps. For there is no faithfulness in their mouth. Their inward part is very wickedness. Their throat is an open sepulcher. With their tongue they deceive.
Ps. Hold them guilty, O God. Let them fall by their own counsels. Thrust them out in the multitude of their transgressions. For they have rebelled against thee.
Ps. But let all those who take refuge in thee rejoice. Let them ever shout for joy, because thou defend them. Let those also who love thy name be joyful in thee.
Ps. For thou will bless the righteous man, O Jehovah. Thou will encompass him with favor as with a shield. Selah.
Ps. O Jehovah, rebuke me not in thine anger, nor chasten me in thy hot displeasure.
Ps. Have mercy upon me, O Jehovah, for I am withered away. O Jehovah, heal me, for my bones are troubled.
Ps. My soul also is greatly troubled. And thou, O Jehovah, how long?
Ps. Return, O Jehovah, deliver my soul. Save me for thy loving kindness' sake.
Ps. For in death there is no remembrance of thee. In Sheol who shall give thee thanks?
Ps. I am weary with my groaning. Every night I make my bed to swim. I water my couch with my tears.
Ps. My eye wastes away because of grief. It grows old because of all my adversaries.
Ps. Depart from me, all ye workers of iniquity, for Jehovah has heard the voice of my weeping.
Ps. Jehovah has heard my supplication. Jehovah will receive my prayer.
Ps. All my enemies shall be put to shame and greatly troubled. They shall turn back. They shall be put to shame suddenly.
Ps. O Jehovah my God, in thee do I take refuge. Save me from all those who pursue me,  deliver me,
Ps. lest they tear my soul like a lion, rending it in pieces, while there is none to deliver.
Ps. O Jehovah my God, if I have done this, if there be iniquity in my hands,
Ps. if I have rewarded evil to him who was at peace with me, (yea, I have delivered him without cause who was my adversary),
Ps. let the enemy pursue my soul,  overtake it. Yea, let him tread my life down to the earth,  lay my glory in the dust. Selah.
Ps. Arise, O Jehovah, in thine anger. Lift up thyself against the rage of my adversaries,  awake for me the justice thou have commanded.
Ps. And let the congregation of the peoples encompass thee about,  return thou on high over them.
Ps. Jehovah shall judge the peoples. Judge me, O Jehovah, according to my righteousness,  to my integrity that is in me.
Ps. O let the wickedness of the wicked man come to an end,  establish thou the righteous man. For the righteous God tries the minds and hearts.
Ps. My shield is with God, who saves the upright in heart.
Ps. God is a righteous judge. Yea, a God who has indignation every day.
Ps. If a man does not repent, he will whet his sword. He has bent his bow,  made it ready.
Ps. He has also prepared for him the instruments of death. He makes his arrows fiery.
Ps. Behold the wicked man, he travails with iniquity. Yea, he has conceived mischief,  brought forth falsehood.
Ps. He has made a pit,  dug it,  is fallen into the ditch which he made.
Ps. His mischief shall return upon his own head,  his violence shall come down upon his own scalp.
Ps. I will give thanks to Jehovah according to his righteousness,  will sing praise to the name of Jehovah Most High.
Ps. O Jehovah, our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth, who has set thy glory upon the heavens!
Ps. Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings thou have perfected praise, because of thine adversaries, that thou might still the enemy and the avenger.
Ps. When I consider thy heavens, the work of thy fingers, the moon and the stars, which thou have ordained,
Ps. what is man that thou remember him? And the son of man that thou succor him?
Ps. For thou have made him but little lower than agents,  crowned him with glory and honor.
Ps. Thou make him to have dominion over the works of thy hands. Thou have put all things under his feet.
Ps. All sheep and oxen, yea,  the beasts of the field,
Ps. the birds of the heavens,  the fish of the sea, whatever passes through the paths of the seas.
Ps. O Jehovah, our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth!
Ps. I will give thanks to Jehovah with my whole heart. I will show forth all thy marvelous works.
Ps. I will be glad and exult in thee. I will sing praise to thy name, O thou Most High.
Ps. When my enemies turn back, they stumble and perish at thy presence.
Ps. For thou have maintained my right and my cause. Thou sit in the throne judging righteously.
Ps. Thou have rebuked the nations. Thou have destroyed the wicked. Thou have blotted out their name forever and ever.
Ps. The enemy have come to an end. They are desolate forever,  the cities which thou have overthrown. The very memory of them is perished,
Ps. but Jehovah will endure forever. He has prepared his throne for judgment,
Ps. and he will judge the world in righteousness. He will minister justice to the peoples in uprightness.
Ps. Jehovah will also be a high tower for the oppressed, a high tower in times of trouble.
Ps. And those who know thy name will put their trust in thee, for thou, Jehovah, have not forsaken those who seek thee.
Ps. Sing praises to Jehovah, who dwells in Zion. Declare among the people his doings.
Ps. For he who makes inquiry for blood remembers them. He does not forget the cry of the poor.
Ps. Have mercy upon me, O Jehovah. Behold my affliction from those who hate me, thou who lifts me up from the gates of death
Ps. that I may show forth all thy praise. In the gates of the daughter of Zion I will rejoice in thy salvation.
Ps. The nations are sunk down in the pit that they made. In the net which they hid, their own foot is taken.
Ps. Jehovah has made himself known. He has executed justice. The wicked man is snared in the work of his own hands. Higgaion. Selah.
Ps. Wicked men shall be turned back to Sheol, even all the nations that forget God.
Ps. For a needy man shall not always be forgotten, nor the expectation of the poor perish forever.
Ps. Arise, O Jehovah, let not man prevail. Let the nations be judged in thy sight.
Ps. Put them in fear, O Jehovah. Let the nations know themselves to be but men. Selah.
Ps. Why do thou stand afar off, O Jehovah? Why do thou hide thyself in times of trouble?
Ps. In the pride of the wicked man the poor man is hotly pursued. Let them be taken in the devices that they have conceived.
Ps. For the wicked man boasts of his heart's desire. And the greedy man renounces, yea, despises Jehovah.
Ps. The wicked man, in the pride of his countenance, says, He will not require it. All his thoughts are, There is no God.
Ps. His ways are profane at all times. Thy judgments are far above out of his sight. As for all his adversaries, he puffs at them.
Ps. He says in his heart, I shall not be moved. To all generations I shall not be in adversity.
Ps. His mouth is full of cursing and deceit and oppression. Under his tongue is mischief and iniquity.
Ps. He sits in the lurking-places of the villages. In the covert places he murders the innocent man. His eyes are secretly set against the poor man.
Ps. He lurks in secret as a lion in his covert. He lies in wait to catch the poor man. He catches the poor man when he draws him in his net.
Ps. He crouches, he bows down,  helpless men fall by his strong men.
Ps. He says in his heart, God has forgotten. He hides his face. He will never see it.
Ps. Arise, O Jehovah, O God, lift up thy hand. Do not forget the poor.
Ps. Why does the wicked man despise God,  say in his heart, Thou will not require it?
Ps. Thou have seen. For thou behold mischief and spite, to repay with thy hand. The poor man commits himself to thee. Thou have been the helper of the fatherless.
Ps. Break thou the arm of the sinner and the evil man. His wickedness shall be sought,  shall not be found.
Ps. Jehovah is King forever and ever. The nations have perished out of his land.
Ps. Jehovah, thou have heard the desire of the humble. Thou will prepare their heart, thou will cause thine ear to hear,
Ps. to judge the fatherless and the oppressed, that man who is of the earth may no more be terrible.
Ps. In Jehovah I take refuge. How will ye say to my soul, Flee as a bird to your mountain.
Ps. For, lo, the wicked bend the bow. They make ready their arrow upon the string that they may shoot in darkness at the upright in heart.
Ps. If the foundations be destroyed, what can a righteous man do?
Ps. Jehovah is in his holy temple. Jehovah's throne is in heaven. His eyes, behold, his eyelids try, the sons of men.
Ps. Jehovah tries the righteous man,  his soul hates the wicked man and him who loves violence.
Ps. He will rain snares upon sinners. Fire and brimstone and burning wind shall be the portion of their cup.
Ps. For Jehovah is righteous. He loves righteousness. The upright man shall behold his face.
Ps. Help, Jehovah, for the holy man ceases, for the faithful fail from among the sons of men.
Ps. They speak falsehood everyone with his neighbor. With flattering lip,  with a double heart, they speak.
Ps. Jehovah will cut off all flattering lips, the tongue that speaks great things,
Ps. who have said, With our tongue will we prevail. Our lips are our own. Who is lord over us?
Ps. Because of the oppression of the poor, because of the sighing of the needy, now I will arise, says Jehovah. I will set him in the safety he gasps for.
Ps. The words of Jehovah are pure words, as silver tried in a furnace on the earth, purified seven times.
Ps. Thou will keep them, O Jehovah. Thou will preserve them from this generation forever.
Ps. The wicked walk on every side when vileness is exalted among the sons of men.
Ps. How long, O Jehovah? Will thou forget me forever? How long will thou hide thy face from me?
Ps. How long shall I take counsel in my soul, having sorrow in my heart all the day? How long shall my enemy be exalted over me?
Ps. Consider and answer me, O Jehovah my God. Lighten my eyes, lest I sleep the death,
Ps. lest my enemy say, I have prevailed against him, lest my adversaries rejoice when I am moved.
Ps. But I have trusted in thy loving kindness. My heart shall rejoice in thy salvation.
Ps. I will sing to Jehovah because he has dealt bountifully with me.
Ps. The fool has said in his heart, There is no God. They are corrupt. They have done abominable works. There is none that does good.
Ps. Jehovah looked down from heaven upon the sons of men to see if there were any who understood, who sought after God.
Ps. They are all gone aside. They are together become filthy. There is none who does good, no, not one.
Ps. Have all the workers of iniquity no knowledge, who eat up my people as they eat bread,  call not upon Jehovah?
Ps. There they were in great fear, for God is in the generation of the righteous.
Ps. Ye put to shame the counsel of the poor because Jehovah is his refuge.
Ps. O that the salvation of Israel came out of Zion! When Jehovah brings back the captivity of his people, then Jacob shall rejoice,  Israel shall be glad.
Ps. Jehovah, who shall sojourn in thy tabernacle? Who shall dwell in thy holy hill?
Ps. He who walks uprightly,  works righteousness,  speaks truth in his heart,
Ps. he who does no slander with his tongue, nor does evil to his friend, nor takes up a reproach against his neighbor,
Ps. in whose eyes a reprobate is despised,  who honors those who fear Jehovah, he that swears to his own hurt,  changes not,
Ps. he who puts not his money out to interest, nor takes a bribe against the innocent. He who does these things shall never be moved.
Ps. Preserve me, O God, for in thee do I take refuge.
Ps. Thou my soul have said to Jehovah, Thou are my Lord. I have no good beyond thee.
Ps. As for the sanctified who are in the earth, they are the excellent in whom is all my delight.
Ps. Their sorrows shall be multiplied who give gifts for another god. Their drink offerings of blood I will not offer, nor take their names upon my lips.
Ps. Jehovah is the portion of my inheritance and of my cup. Thou maintain my lot.
Ps. The lines are fallen to me in pleasant places. Yea, I have a fine heritage.
Ps. I will bless Jehovah, who has given me counsel. Yea, my heart instructs me in the night seasons.
Ps. I beheld Jehovah always before me. Because he is at my right hand, I shall not be moved.
Ps. Therefore my heart is glad,  my glory rejoices. My flesh also shall dwell in hope.
Ps. For thou will not leave my soul to Sheol, nor will thou allow thy holy man to see corruption.
Ps. Thou made known to me the path of life. Thou will fill me of joy with thy countenance.
Ps. Hear the right, O Jehovah, attend to my cry. Give ear to my prayer, that goes not out of feigned lips.
Ps. Let my justice come forth from thy presence. Let thine eyes look upon equity.
Ps. Thou have proved my heart. Thou have visited me in the night. Thou have tried me,  find nothing. I have purposed that my mouth shall not transgress.
Ps. As for the works of men, by the word of thy lips I have kept from the ways of a violent man.
Ps. My steps have held fast to thy paths. My feet have not slipped.
Ps. I have called upon thee, for thou will answer me, O God. Incline thine ear to me,  hear my speech.
Ps. Show thy marvelous loving kindness, O thou who saves by thy right hand those who take refuge from those who rise up.
Ps. Keep me as the apple of the eye. Hide me under the shadow of thy wings,
Ps. from the wicked who oppress me, my deadly enemies, who encompass me around.
Ps. They are enclosed in their own fat. With their mouth they speak proudly.
Ps. They have now encompassed us in our steps. They set their eyes to cast down to the earth.
Ps. He is like a lion that is greedy of his prey,  as it were a young lion lurking in secret places.
Ps. Arise, O Jehovah, confront him. Cast him down. Deliver my soul from the wicked by thy sword,
Ps. from men by thy hand, O Jehovah, from men of the world whose portion is in this life,  whose belly thou fill with thy treasure. They are satisfied with sons,  leave the rest of their substance to their babes.
Ps. As for me, I shall behold thy face in righteousness. I shall be satisfied, when I awake, with thy form.
Ps. I love thee, O Jehovah, my strength.
Ps. Jehovah is my rock,  my fortress,  my deliverer, my God, my rock, in whom I will take refuge, my shield,  the horn of my salvation, my high tower.
Ps. I will call upon Jehovah, who is worthy to be praised. So I shall be saved from my enemies.
Ps. The cords of death encompassed me,  the floods of lawlessness made me afraid.
Ps. The cords of Sheol were round about me. The snares of death came upon me.
Ps. In my distress I called upon Jehovah,  cried to my God. He heard my voice out of his temple,  my cry before him came into his ears.
Ps. Then the earth shook and trembled. The foundations also of the mountains quaked and were shaken because he was angry.
Ps. There went up a smoke out of his nostrils,  fire out of his mouth devoured. Coals were kindled by it.
Ps. He also bowed the heavens,  came down,  thick darkness was under his feet.
Ps. And he rode upon a cherub,  flew. Yea, he soared upon the wings of the wind.
Ps. He made darkness his hiding-place, his pavilion round about him, darkness of waters, thick clouds of the skies.
Ps. At the brightness before him his thick clouds passed, hailstones and coals of fire.
Ps. Jehovah also thundered in the heavens,  the Most High uttered his voice, hailstones and coals of fire.
Ps. And he sent out his arrows,  scattered them, Yea, lightnings manifold,  discomfited them.
Ps. Then the channels of waters appeared,  the foundations of the world were laid bare at thy rebuke, O Jehovah, at the blast of the breath of thy nostrils.
Ps. He sent from on high, he took me, he drew me out of many waters.
Ps. He delivered me from my strong enemy,  from those who hated me, for they were too mighty for me.
Ps. They came upon me in the day of my calamity,  Jehovah was my stay.
Ps. He also brought me forth into a large place. He delivered me because he delighted in me.
Ps. Jehovah has rewarded me according to my righteousness. According to the cleanness of my hands he has recompensed me.
Ps. For I have kept the ways of Jehovah,  have not wickedly departed from my God.
Ps. For all his ordinances were before me,  I put not away his statutes from me.
Ps. I was also perfect with him,  I kept myself from my iniquity.
Ps. Therefore Jehovah has recompensed me according to my righteousness, according to the cleanness of my hands in his eyesight.
Ps. With the merciful thou will show thyself merciful. With the perfect man thou will show thyself perfect.
Ps. With the pure thou will show thyself pure. And with the perverse thou will show thyself contrary.
Ps. For thou will save the afflicted people,  the haughty eyes thou will bring down.
Ps. For thou will light my lamp. Jehovah my God will lighten my darkness.
Ps. For by thee I run upon a troop,  by my God I leap over a wall.
Ps. As for God, his way is perfect. The word of Jehovah is tried. He is a shield to all those who take refuge in him.
Ps. For who is God, except Jehovah? And who is a rock, besides our God,
Ps. the God who girds me with strength,  makes my way perfect?
Ps. He makes my feet like hinds' feet,  sets me upon my high places.
Ps. He teaches my hands to war, so that my arms bend a bow of brass.
Ps. Thou have also given me the shield of thy salvation,  thy right hand has held me up,  thy gentleness has made me great.
Ps. Thou have enlarged my steps under me,  my feet have not slipped.
Ps. I will pursue my enemies,  overtake them. Neither will I turn again till they are consumed.
Ps. I will smite them through, so that they shall not be able to rise. They shall fall under my feet.
Ps. For thou have girded me with strength to the battle. Thou have subdued under me those who rose up against me.
Ps. Thou have also made my enemies turn their backs to me, that I might cut off those who hate me.
Ps. They cried,  there was none to save, even to Jehovah,  he answered them not.
Ps. Then I beat them small as the dust before the wind. I cast them out as the mire of the streets.
Ps. Thou have delivered me from the strivings of the people. Thou have made me the head of the nations. A people whom I have not known shall serve me.
Ps. As soon as they hear of me they shall obey me. The foreigners shall submit themselves to me.
Ps. The foreigners shall fade away,  shall come trembling out of their close places.
Ps. Jehovah lives,  blessed be my rock,  exalted be the God of my salvation,
Ps. even the God who executes vengeance for me,  subdues peoples under me.
Ps. He rescues me from my enemies. Yea, thou lift me up above those who rise up against me. Thou deliver me from the violent man.
Ps. Therefore I will give thanks to thee, O Jehovah, among the Gentiles,  will sing praises to thy name.
Ps. He gives great deliverance to his king,  shows loving kindness to his anointed, to David and to his seed, for evermore.
Ps. The heavens declare the glory of God,  the firmament shows his handiwork.
Ps. Day to day utters speech,  night to night shows knowledge.
Ps. There is no speech nor language in which their voice is not heard.
Ps. Their line has gone out through all the earth,  their words to the end of the world. In them he has set a tabernacle for the sun,
Ps. which is as a bridegroom coming out of his chamber,  rejoices as a strong man to run his course.
Ps. His going forth is from the end of the heavens,  his circuit to the ends of it,  there is nothing hid from the heat of it.
Ps. The law of Jehovah is perfect, restoring the soul. The testimony of Jehovah is sure, making a simple man wise.
Ps. The precepts of Jehovah are right, rejoicing the heart. The commandment of Jehovah is pure, enlightening the eyes.
Ps. The fear of Jehovah is clean, enduring forever. The ordinances of Jehovah are true,  righteous altogether.
Ps. More to be desired are they than gold, yea, than much fine gold. Sweeter also than honey and the droppings of the honeycomb.
Ps. Moreover by them thy servant is warned. In keeping them there is great reward.
Ps. Who can discern his errors? Clear thou me from hidden faults.
Ps. Keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins. Let them not have dominion over me. Then I shall be upright,  I shall be clear from great transgression.
Ps. Let the words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart be acceptable in thy sight, O Jehovah, my rock,  my redeemer.
Ps. Jehovah answer thee in the day of trouble. The name of the God of Jacob set thee up on high,
Ps. send thee help from the sanctuary,  strengthen thee out of Zion,
Ps. remember all thy offerings,  accept thy burnt-sacrifice (Selah),
Ps. grant thee thy heart's desire,  fulfill all thy counsel.
Ps. We will triumph in thy salvation,  in the name of our God we will set up our banners. Jehovah fulfill all thy petitions.
Ps. Now I know that Jehovah saves his anointed. He will answer him from his holy heaven with the saving strength of his right hand.
Ps. Some trust in chariots,  some in horses,  we will make mention of the name of Jehovah our God.
Ps. They are bowed down and fallen,  we are risen,  stand upright.
Ps. Save, Jehovah! Let the King answer us when we call.
Ps. The king shall joy in thy strength, O Jehovah. And in thy salvation how greatly he shall rejoice!
Ps. Thou have given him his heart's desire,  have not withheld the request of his lips. Selah.
Ps. For thou meet him with the blessings of goodness. Thou set a crown of fine gold on his head.
Ps. He asked life from thee. Thou gave it him, even length of days forever and ever.
Ps. His glory is great in thy salvation. Honor and majesty thou do lay upon him.
Ps. For thou make him most blessed forever. Thou make him glad with joy in thy presence.
Ps. For the king trusts in Jehovah. And through the loving kindness of the Most High he shall not be moved.
Ps. Thy hand will find out all thine enemies. Thy right hand will find out those who hate thee.
Ps. Thou will make them as a fiery furnace in the time of thine anger. Jehovah will swallow them up in his wrath,  the fire shall devour them.
Ps. Thou will destroy their fruit from the earth,  their seed from among the sons of men.
Ps. For they intended evil against thee. They conceived a device which they are not able to perform.
Ps. For thou will make them turn their back. Thou will make ready with thy bowstrings against their face.
Ps. Be thou exalted, O Jehovah, in thy strength. We will sing and praise thy power.
Ps. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me, far from helping me,  the words of my groaning?
Ps. O my God, I cry in the daytime,  thou answer not,  in the night season,  I am not silent.
Ps. But thou are holy, O thou who inhabit the praises of Israel.
Ps. Our fathers trusted in thee. They trusted,  thou delivered them.
Ps. They cried to thee,  were delivered. They trusted in thee,  were not put to shame.
Ps. But I am a worm,  no man, a reproach of men,  despised by the people.
Ps. All those who see me laugh me to scorn. They shoot out the lip. They shake the head, saying,
Ps. He trusted on Jehovah. Let him deliver him. Let him rescue him, since he delights in him.
Ps. But thou are he who took me out of the womb. Thou made me trust upon my mother's breasts.
Ps. I was cast upon thee from the womb. Thou are my God since my mother bore me.
Ps. Be not far from me, for trouble is near, for there is none to help.
Ps. Many bulls have encompassed me. Strong bulls of Bashan have beset me around.
Ps. They gape upon me with their mouth, as a ravening and a roaring lion.
Ps. I am poured out like water,  all my bones are out of joint. My heart is like wax; it is melted within me.
Ps. My strength is dried up like a potsherd,  my tongue clings to my jaws,  thou have brought me into the dust of death.
Ps. For dogs have encompassed me. A company of evildoers have enclosed me. They pierced my hands and my feet.
Ps. I may count all my bones. They look and stare upon me.
Ps. They part my garments among them,  upon my vesture do they cast a lot.
Ps. But be thou not far off, O Jehovah. O thou my succor, hasten thee to help me.
Ps. Deliver my soul from the sword, the only one of me from the power of the dog.
Ps. Save me from the lion's mouth, yea, from the horns of the wild-oxen. Thou have answered me.
Ps. I will declare thy name to my brothers. In the midst of the congregation I will praise thee.
Ps. Ye who fear Jehovah, praise him. All ye the seed of Jacob, glorify him,  stand in awe of him, all ye the seed of Israel.
Ps. For he has not despised nor abhorred the affliction of the afflicted, neither has he hid his face from him,  when he cried to him, he heard.
Ps. From thee comes my praise in the great assembly. I will pay my vows before those who fear him.
Ps. The meek shall eat and be satisfied. They shall praise Jehovah who seek after him. Let your heart live forever.
Ps. All the ends of the earth shall remember and turn to Jehovah,  all the kinfolk of the nations shall worship before thee.
Ps. For the kingdom is Jehovah's,  he is the ruler over the nations.
Ps. All the fat ones of the earth shall eat and worship. All those who go down to the dust shall bow before him, even he who cannot keep his soul alive.
Ps. A seed shall serve him. It shall be told of the Lord to the next generation.
Ps. They shall come and shall declare his righteousness to a people that shall be born, that he has done it.
Ps. Jehovah is my shepherd, I shall not want.
Ps. He makes me to lie down in green pastures. He leads me beside still waters.
Ps. He restores my soul. He guides me in the paths of righteousness for his name's sake.
Ps. Yea, tho I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for thou are with me, thy rod and thy staff, they comfort me.
Ps. Thou prepare a table before me in the presence of my enemies. Thou have anointed my head with oil. My cup runs over.
Ps. Surely goodness and loving kindness shall follow me all the days of my life,  I shall dwell in the house of Jehovah forever.
Ps. The earth is Jehovah's,  the fullness thereof, the world,  those who dwell therein.
Ps. For he has founded it upon the seas,  established it upon the floods.
Ps. Who shall ascend into the hill of Jehovah? And who shall stand in his holy place?
Ps. He who has clean hands,  a pure heart, who has not lifted up his soul to falsehood,  has not sworn deceitfully.
Ps. He shall receive a blessing from Jehovah,  righteousness from the God of his salvation.
Ps. This is the generation of those who seek after him, who seek thy face, even Jacob. Selah.
Ps. Lift up your heads, O ye gates,  be ye lifted up, ye everlasting doors,  the King of glory will come in.
Ps. Who is the King of glory? Jehovah strong and mighty, Jehovah mighty in battle.
Ps. Lift up your heads, O ye gates. Yea, lift them up, ye everlasting doors,  the King of glory will come in.
Ps. Who is this King of glory? Jehovah of hosts, He is the King of glory. Selah.
Ps. To thee, O Jehovah, do I lift up my soul.
Ps. O my God, in thee I have trusted. Let me not be put to shame. Let not my enemies triumph over me.
Ps. Yea, none who wait for thee shall be put to shame. They shall be put to shame who deal treacherously without cause.
Ps. Show me thy ways, O Jehovah. Teach me thy paths.
Ps. Guide me in thy truth,  teach me. For thou are the God of my salvation. For thee do I wait all the day.
Ps. Remember, O Jehovah, thy tender mercies and thy loving kindness. For they have been ever of old.
Ps. Remember not the sins of my youth, nor my transgressions. According to thy loving kindness remember thou me, for thy goodness' sake, O Jehovah.
Ps. Good and upright is Jehovah. Therefore he will instruct sinners in the way.
Ps. The meek he will guide in justice,  the meek he will teach his way.
Ps. All the paths of Jehovah are loving kindness and truth to such as keep his covenant and his testimonies.
Ps. For thy name's sake, O Jehovah, pardon my iniquity, for it is great.
Ps. What man is he who fears Jehovah? Him he shall instruct in the way that he shall choose.
Ps. His soul shall dwell at ease,  his seed shall inherit the land.
Ps. The friendship of Jehovah is with those who fear him,  he will show them his covenant.
Ps. My eyes are ever toward Jehovah, for he will pluck my feet out of the net.
Ps. Turn thee to me,  have mercy upon me, for I am desolate and afflicted.
Ps. The troubles of my heart are enlarged. O bring thou me out of my distresses.
Ps. Consider my affliction and my travail,  forgive all my sins.
Ps. Consider my enemies, for they are many. And they hate me with cruel hatred.
Ps. O keep my soul,  deliver me. Let me not be put to shame, for I take refuge in thee.
Ps. Let integrity and uprightness preserve me, for I wait for thee.
Ps. Redeem Israel, O God, out of all of his troubles.
Ps. Judge me, O Jehovah, for I have walked in my integrity. I have also trusted in Jehovah without wavering.
Ps. Examine me, O Jehovah,  prove me. Try my heart and my mind.
Ps. For thy loving kindness is before my eyes,  I have walked in thy truth.
Ps. I have not sat with men of falsehood, nor will I go in with dissemblers.
Ps. I hate the assembly of evildoers,  will not sit with the wicked.
Ps. I will wash my hands in innocence, so I will encompass thine altar, O Jehovah,
Ps. that I may make the voice of thanksgiving to be heard,  tell of all thy wondrous works.
Ps. Jehovah, I love the habitation of thy house,  the place where thy glory dwells.
Ps. Gather not my soul with sinners, nor my life with men of blood,
Ps. in whose hands is wickedness,  their right hand is full of bribes.
Ps. But as for me, I will walk in my integrity. Redeem me,  be merciful to me.
Ps. My foot stands in an even place. In the congregations I will bless Jehovah.
Ps. Jehovah is my light and my salvation, whom shall I fear? Jehovah is the strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid?
Ps. When evildoers came upon me to eat up my flesh, even my adversaries and my foes, they stumbled and fell.
Ps. Though an army should encamp against me, my heart shall not fear. Though war should rise against me, even then I will be confident.
Ps. One thing I have asked of Jehovah, that I will seek after, that I may dwell in the house of Jehovah all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of Jehovah,  to inquire in his temple.
Ps. For in the day of trouble he will hide me in his pavilion. In the covert of his tabernacle he will hide me. He will lift me up upon a rock.
Ps. And now my head shall be lifted up above my enemies round about me. And I will offer in his tabernacle sacrifices of joy. I will sing, yea, I will sing praises to Jehovah.
Ps. Hear, O Jehovah, when I cry with my voice. Have mercy also upon me,  answer me.
Ps. My heart said to thee, I have sought thy face. O Jehovah, I will seek thy face.
Ps. Hide not thy face from me. Put not thy servant away in anger. Thou have been my help. Cast me not off, nor forsake me, O God of my salvation.
Ps. When my father and my mother forsake me, then Jehovah will take me up.
Ps. Teach me thy way, O Jehovah,  lead me in a plain path, because of my enemies.
Ps. Deliver me not over to the will of my adversaries. For false witnesses are risen up against me,  such as breathe out cruelty.
Ps. I believe that I shall see the goodness of Jehovah in the land of the living.
Ps. Wait for Jehovah. Be strong,  let thy heart take courage. Yea, wait thou for Jehovah.
Ps. To thee, O Jehovah, I will call. My rock, be not thou deaf to me, lest, if thou be silent to me, I become like those who go down into the pit.
Ps. Hear the voice of my supplications when I cry to thee, when I lift up my hands toward thy holy oracle.
Ps. Draw me not away with the wicked,  with the workers of iniquity, who speak peace with their neighbors,  mischief is in their hearts.
Ps. Give them according to their work,  according to the wickedness of their doings. Give them after the operation of their hands. Render to them their recompense,
Ps. because they regard not the works of Jehovah, nor the operation of his hands. He will break them down and not build them up.
Ps. Blessed be Jehovah, because he has heard the voice of my supplications.
Ps. Jehovah is my strength and my shield. My heart has trusted in him,  I am helped. Therefore my heart greatly rejoices,  with my song I will praise him.
Ps. Jehovah is their strength,  he is a stronghold of salvation to his anointed.
Ps. Save thy people,  bless thine inheritance. Be their shepherd also,  bear them up forever.
Ps. Ascribe to Jehovah, O ye sons of the mighty, ascribe to Jehovah glory and strength.
Ps. Ascribe to Jehovah the glory due to his name. Worship Jehovah in holy array.
Ps. The voice of Jehovah is upon the waters. The God of glory thunders, even Jehovah upon many waters.
Ps. The voice of Jehovah is powerful. The voice of Jehovah is full of majesty.
Ps. The voice of Jehovah breaks the cedars. Yea, Jehovah breaks in pieces the cedars of Lebanon.
Ps. He makes them also to skip like a calf, Lebanon and Sirion like a young wild-ox.
Ps. The voice of Jehovah splits the flames of fire.
Ps. The voice of Jehovah shakes the wilderness. Jehovah shakes the wilderness of Kadesh.
Ps. The voice of Jehovah makes the hinds to calve,  strips the forests bare. And in his temple everything says, Glory.
Ps. Jehovah sat as King at the Flood. Yea, Jehovah sits as King forever.
Ps. Jehovah will give strength to his people. Jehovah will bless his people with peace.
Ps. I will extol thee, O Jehovah, for thou have raised me up,  have not made my foes to rejoice over me.
Ps. O Jehovah my God, I cried to thee,  thou have healed me.
Ps. O Jehovah, thou have brought up my soul from Sheol. Thou have kept me alive, that I should not go down to the pit.
Ps. Sing praise to Jehovah, O ye sanctified of his,  give thanks to his holiness.
Ps. For his anger is but for a moment. His favor is for a lifetime. Weeping may tarry for the night,  joy is in the morning.
Ps. As for me, I said in my prosperity, I shall never be moved.
Ps. Thou, Jehovah, of thy favor had made my mountain to stand strong. Thou hid thy face; I was troubled.
Ps. I cried to thee, O Jehovah,  to Jehovah I made supplication.
Ps. What profit is there in my blood when I go down to the pit? Shall the dust praise thee? Shall it declare thy truth?
Ps. Hear, O Jehovah,  have mercy upon me. Jehovah, be thou my helper.
Ps. Thou have turned for me my mourning into dancing. Thou have loosed my sackcloth,  girded me with gladness,
Ps. to the end that my glory may sing praise to thee,  not be silent. O Jehovah my God, I will give thanks to thee forever.
Ps. In thee, O Jehovah, do I take refuge. Let me never be put to shame. Deliver me in thy righteousness.
Ps. Bow down thine ear to me. Deliver me speedily. Be thou to me a strong rock, a house of defense to save me.
Ps. For thou are my rock and my fortress. Therefore for thy name's sake lead me and guide me.
Ps. Pluck me out of the net that they have laid secretly for me, for thou are my stronghold.
Ps. Into thy hand I commend my spirit. Thou have redeemed me, O Jehovah, thou God of truth.
Ps. I hate those who regard lying vanities,  I trust in Jehovah.
Ps. I will be glad and rejoice in thy loving kindness, for thou have seen my affliction. Thou have known my soul in adversities,
Ps. and thou have not shut me up into the hand of the enemy. Thou have set my feet in a large place.
Ps. Have mercy upon me, O Jehovah, for I am in distress. My eye wastes away with grief, yea, my soul and my body.
Ps. For my life is spent with sorrow,  my years with sighing. My strength fails because of my iniquity,  my bones are wasted away.
Ps. I have become a reproach because of all my adversaries, yea, to my neighbors exceedingly,  a fear to my acquaintances. Those who saw me outside fled from me.
Ps. I am forgotten as a dead man out of mind. I am like a broken vessel.
Ps. For I have heard the slander of many. Fear was on every side, while they took counsel together against me. They devised to take away my life.
Ps. But I trusted in thee, O Jehovah. I said, Thou are my God.
Ps. My times are in thy hand. Deliver me from the hand of my enemies,  from those who persecute me.
Ps. Make thy face to shine upon thy servant. Save me in thy loving kindness.
Ps. Let me not be put to shame, O Jehovah, for I have called upon thee. Let the wicked be put to shame. Let them be silent in Sheol.
Ps. Let the lying lips be dumb, which speak against the righteous man insolently, with pride and contempt.
Ps. O how great is thy goodness, which thou have laid up for those who fear thee, which thou have wrought for those who take refuge in thee before the sons of men!
Ps. In the covert of thy presence thou will hide them from the plotting of man. Thou will keep them secretly in a pavilion from the strife of tongues.
Ps. Blessed be Jehovah, for he has shown me his marvelous loving kindness in a strong city.
Ps. As for me, I said in my haste, I am cut off from before thine eyes. Nevertheless thou heard the voice of my supplications when I cried to thee.
Ps. O love Jehovah, all ye his sanctified. Jehovah preserves the faithful,  plentifully repays him who deals proudly.
Ps. Be strong,  let your heart take courage, all ye who hope in Jehovah.
Ps. Blessed are those whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered.
Ps. Blessed is the man to whom Jehovah does not impute sin,  in whose spirit there is no deceit.
Ps. When I kept silence, my bones wasted away through my groaning all the day long.
Ps. For day and night thy hand was heavy upon me. My moisture was changed as with the drought of summer. Selah.
Ps. I acknowledged my sin to thee,  I did not hide my iniquity. I said, I will confess my transgressions to Jehovah,  thou forgave the iniquity of my sin. Selah.
Ps. For this let everyone who is devout pray to thee in a time when thou may be found. Surely when the great waters overflow they shall not reach to him.
Ps. Thou are my hiding-place. Thou will preserve me from trouble. Thou will encompass me around with songs of deliverance. Selah.
Ps. I will instruct thee and teach thee in the way which thou shall go. I will counsel thee with my eye upon thee.
Ps. Become ye not as the horse, or as the mule, which have no understanding, whose trappings must be bit and bridle to hold them in, else they will not come near to thee.
Ps. Many sorrows shall be to the wicked,  he who trusts in Jehovah, loving kindness shall encompass him about.
Ps. Be glad in Jehovah,  rejoice, ye righteous. And shout for joy, all ye who are upright in heart.
Ps. Rejoice in Jehovah, O ye righteous. Praise is comely for the upright.
Ps. Give thanks to Jehovah with the harp. Sing praises to him with the psaltery of ten strings.
Ps. Sing to him a new song. Play skillfully with a loud noise.
Ps. For the word of Jehovah is right,  all his work is done in faithfulness.
Ps. He loves righteousness and justice. The earth is full of the loving kindness of Jehovah.
Ps. By the word of Jehovah were the heavens made,  all the host of them by the breath of his mouth.
Ps. He gathers the waters of the sea together as a heap. He lays up the deeps in store-houses.
Ps. Let all the earth fear Jehovah. Let all the inhabitants of the world stand in awe of him.
Ps. For he spoke,  it was done. He commanded,  it stood fast.
Ps. Jehovah brings the counsel of the nations to naught. He makes the thoughts of the peoples to be of no effect.
Ps. The counsel of Jehovah stands fast forever, the thoughts of his heart to all generations.
Ps. Blessed is the nation whose God is Jehovah, the people whom he has chosen for his own inheritance.
Ps. Jehovah looks from heaven. He beholds all the sons of men.
Ps. From the place of his habitation he looks forth upon all the inhabitants of the earth;
Ps. he who fashions the hearts of them all, who considers all their works.
Ps. There is no king saved by the multitude of an army. A mighty man is not delivered by great strength.
Ps. A horse is a vain thing for safety, nor does he deliver any by his great power.
Ps. Behold, the eye of Jehovah is upon those who fear him, upon those who hope in his loving kindness,
Ps. to deliver their soul from death,  to keep them alive in famine.
Ps. Our soul has waited for Jehovah. He is our help and our shield.
Ps. For our heart shall rejoice in him because we have trusted in his holy name.
Ps. Let thy loving kindness, O Jehovah, be upon us, according as we have hoped in thee.
Ps. I will bless Jehovah at all times. His praise shall continually be in my mouth.
Ps. My soul shall make its boast in Jehovah. The humble shall hear of it,  be glad.
Ps. O magnify Jehovah with me,  let us exalt his name together.
Ps. I sought Jehovah,  he answered me,  delivered me from all my fears.
Ps. They looked to him,  were radiant,  their faces shall never be confounded.
Ps. This poor man cried,  Jehovah heard him,  saved him out of all his troubles.
Ps. The agent of Jehovah encamps round about those who fear him,  delivers them.
Ps. O taste and see that Jehovah is good. Blessed is the man who takes refuge in him.
Ps. O fear Jehovah, ye his sanctified, for there is no want to those who fear him.
Ps. The young lions do lack,  suffer hunger,  those who seek Jehovah shall not want any good thing.
Ps. Come, ye children, hearken to me. I will teach you the fear of Jehovah.
Ps. What man is he who desires life,  loves many days, that he may see good?
Ps. Keep thy tongue from evil,  thy lips from speaking deceit.
Ps. Depart from evil,  do good. Seek peace,  pursue it.
Ps. The eyes of Jehovah are toward the righteous,  his ears are open to their prayer.
Ps. (The face of Jehovah is against those who do evil, to cut off the remembrance of them from the earth.)
Ps. They cried,  Jehovah heard,  delivered them out of all their troubles.
Ps. Jehovah is near to those who are of a broken heart,  saves such as are of a contrite spirit.
Ps. Many are the afflictions of the righteous,  Jehovah delivers him out of them all.
Ps. He keeps all his bones. Not one of them is broken.
Ps. Evil shall kill the wicked,  those who hate the righteous shall be condemned.
Ps. Jehovah redeems the soul of his servants,  none of those who take refuge in him shall be condemned.
Ps. Strive thou, O Jehovah, with those who strive with me. Fight thou against those who fight against me.
Ps. Take hold of shield and buckler,  stand up for my help.
Ps. Draw out the spear also,  stop the way against those who pursue me. Say to my soul, I am thy salvation.
Ps. Let them be put to shame and brought to dishonor who seek after my soul. Let them be turned back and confounded who devise my hurt.
Ps. Let them be as chaff before the wind,  the agent of Jehovah driving them on.
Ps. Let their way be dark and slippery,  the agent of Jehovah pursuing them.
Ps. For without cause they have hid their net for me in a pit. Without cause they have dug a pit for my soul.
Ps. Let destruction come upon him unawares,  let his net that he has hid catch himself. Let him fall in it with destruction.
Ps. And my soul shall be joyful in Jehovah. It shall rejoice in his salvation.
Ps. All my bones shall say, Jehovah, who is like thee, who delivers a poor man from him who is too strong for him, yea, a poor and needy man from him who robs him?
Ps. Unrighteous witnesses rise up, they ask me of things that I know not.
Ps. They reward me evil for good, to the bereaving of my soul.
Ps. But as for me, when they were sick my clothing was sackcloth. I afflicted my soul with fasting,  my prayer returned into my own bosom.
Ps. I behaved myself as though it had been my friend or my brother. I bowed down mourning, as he who bewails his mother.
Ps. But in my adversity they rejoiced,  gathered themselves together. The wretches gathered themselves together against me,  I knew it not. They tore me,  ceased not.
Ps. Like the profane mockers in feasts, they gnashed upon me with their teeth.
Ps. Lord, how long will thou look on? Rescue my soul from their destructions, my darling from the lions.
Ps. I will give thee thanks in the great assembly. I will praise thee among much people.
Ps. Let not those who are my enemies wrongfully rejoice over me. Neither let them wink with the eye who hate me without a cause.
Ps. For they speak not peace,  they devise deceitful words against those who are quiet in the land.
Ps. Yea, they opened their mouth wide against me. They said, Aha, aha, our eye has seen it.
Ps. Thou have seen it, O Jehovah. Keep not silence. O Lord, be not far from me.
Ps. Stir up thyself,  awake to the justice to me, to my cause, my God and my Lord.
Ps. Judge me, O Jehovah my God, according to thy righteousness,  let them not rejoice over me.
Ps. Let them not say in their heart, Aha, so would we have it. Let them not say, We have swallowed him up.
Ps. Let them be put to shame and confounded together who rejoice at my hurt. Let them be clothed with shame and dishonor who magnify themselves against me.
Ps. Let them shout for joy,  be glad, who favor my righteous cause. Yea, let them say continually, Jehovah be magnified, who has pleasure in the prosperity of his servant.
Ps. And my tongue shall talk of thy righteousness and of thy praise all the day long.
Ps. The transgression of the wicked man says within my heart, There is no fear of God before his eyes.
Ps. For he flatters himself in his own eyes, that his iniquity will not be found out and be hated.
Ps. The words of his mouth are iniquity and deceit. He has ceased to be wise and to do good.
Ps. He devises iniquity upon his bed. He sets himself in a way that is not good. He does not abhor evil.
Ps. Thy loving kindness, O Jehovah, is in the heavens, thy faithfulness to the skies.
Ps. Thy righteousness is like the mountains of God. Thy judgments are a great deep. O Jehovah, thou preserve man and beast.
Ps. How precious is thy loving kindness, O God,  the sons of men take refuge under the shadow of thy wings.
Ps. They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house,  thou will make them drink of the river of thy pleasures.
Ps. For with thee is the fountain of life. In thy light we shall see light.
Ps. O continue thy loving kindness to those who know thee,  thy righteousness to the upright in heart.
Ps. Let not the foot of pride come against me,  let not the hand of sinners drive me away.
Ps. There are the workers of iniquity fallen. They are thrust down,  shall not be able to rise.
Ps. Fret not thyself because of evildoers, nor be thou envious against those who work unrighteousness.
Ps. For they shall soon be cut down like the grass,  wither as the green herb.
Ps. Trust in Jehovah,  do good. Dwell in the land,  feed on his faithfulness.
Ps. Delight thyself also in Jehovah,  he will give thee the desires of thy heart.
Ps. Commit thy way to Jehovah. Trust also in him,  he will bring it to pass.
Ps. And he will make thy righteousness to go forth as the light,  thy justice as the noon-day.
Ps. Rest in Jehovah,  wait patiently for him. Fret not thyself because of him who prospers in his way, because of the man who brings wicked devices to pass.
Ps. Cease from anger,  forsake wrath. Fret not thyself, it tends only to evil-doing.
Ps. For evildoers shall be cut off,  those who wait for Jehovah, they shall inherit the land.
Ps. For yet a little while,  the wicked man shall not be. Yea, thou shall diligently consider his place,  he shall not be.
Ps. But the meek shall inherit the land,  shall delight themselves in the abundance of peace.
Ps. The wicked man plots against the righteous man,  gnashes upon him with his teeth.
Ps. The Lord will laugh at him, for he sees that his day is coming.
Ps. The wicked have drawn out the sword,  have bent their bow, to cast down the poor and needy, to kill such as are upright in the way.
Ps. Their sword shall enter into their own heart,  their bows shall be broken.
Ps. Better is a little that the righteous man has than the abundance of many wicked men.
Ps. For the arms of the wicked shall be broken,  Jehovah upholds the righteous.
Ps. Jehovah knows the days of the perfect,  their inheritance shall be forever.
Ps. They shall not be put to shame in the time of evil,  in the days of famine they shall be satisfied.
Ps. But the wicked shall perish,  the enemies of Jehovah is as the fat of lambs: they shall disintegrate; they shall disintegrate away into smoke.
Ps. The wicked man borrows,  pays not again,  the righteous man deals graciously,  gives.
Ps. For such as are blessed by him shall inherit the land,  those who are cursed by him shall be cut off.
Ps. A man's goings are established by Jehovah,  he delights in his way.
Ps. Though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down, for Jehovah upholds him with his hand.
Ps. I have been young,  now am old, yet I have not seen a righteous man forsaken, nor his seed begging bread.
Ps. All the day long he deals graciously,  lends,  his seed is blessed.
Ps. Depart from evil,  do good,  dwell for evermore.
Ps. For Jehovah loves justice,  forsakes not his sanctified. They are preserved forever,  the seed of the wicked shall be cut off.
Ps. The righteous shall inherit the land,  dwell in it forever.
Ps. The mouth of a righteous man talks of wisdom,  his tongue speaks justice.
Ps. The law of his God is in his heart. None of his steps shall slide.
Ps. A wicked man watches a righteous man,  seeks to kill him.
Ps. Jehovah will not leave him in his hand, nor condemn him when he is judged.
Ps. Wait for Jehovah,  keep his way,  he will exalt thee to inherit the land. When sinners are cut off, thou shall see it.
Ps. I have seen a wicked man in great power,  spreading himself like a green tree in its native soil.
Ps. But I passed by, , lo, he was not. Yea, I sought him,  he could not be found.
Ps. Mark the perfect man,  behold the upright, for there is a happy end to the man of peace.
Ps. As for transgressors, they shall be destroyed together. The end of the wicked shall be cut off.
Ps. But the salvation of the righteous is of Jehovah. He is their stronghold in the time of trouble,
Ps. and Jehovah helps them,  rescues them. He rescues them from sinners,  saves them, because they have taken refuge in him.
Ps. O Jehovah, rebuke me not in thy wrath, nor chasten me in thy hot displeasure.
Ps. For thine arrows stick fast in me,  thy hand presses me severely.
Ps. There is no soundness in my flesh because of thine indignation, nor is there any health in my bones because of my sin.
Ps. For my iniquities have gone over my head. As a heavy burden they are too heavy for me.
Ps. My wounds are loathsome and corrupt, because of my foolishness.
Ps. I am pained and bowed down greatly. I go mourning all the day long.
Ps. For my loins are filled with burning,  there is no soundness in my flesh.
Ps. I am faint and severely bruised. I have groaned because of the disquietness of my heart.
Ps. Lord, all my desire is before thee,  my groaning is not hid from thee.
Ps. My heart throbs, my strength fails me. As for the light of my eyes, it also is gone from me.
Ps. Those I love and my friends stand aloof from my plague,  my kinsmen stand afar off.
Ps. Those also who seek after my life lay snares for me. And those who seek my hurt speak mischievous things,  meditate deceits all the day long.
Ps. But I, as a deaf man, hear not. And I am as a mute man who opens not his mouth.
Ps. Yea, I am as a man who hears not,  in whose mouth are no reproofs.
Ps. For in thee, O Jehovah, do I hope. Thou will answer, O Lord my God.
Ps. For I said, Lest they rejoice over me. When my foot slips, they magnify themselves against me.
Ps. For I am ready to fall,  my sorrow is continually before me.
Ps. For I will declare my iniquity. I will be sorry for my sin.
Ps. But my enemies are energetic,  are strong,  those who hate me wrongfully are multiplied.
Ps. They also who render evil for good are adversaries to me, because I follow the thing that is good.
Ps. Forsake me not, O Jehovah. O my God, be not far from me.
Ps. Make haste to help me, O Lord, my salvation.
Ps. I said, I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue. I will keep my mouth with a bridle while the wicked man is before me.
Ps. I was mute with silence. I held my peace, even from good,  my sorrow was stirred.
Ps. My heart was hot within me. While I was musing the fire burned. Then I spoke with my tongue:
Ps. Jehovah, make me to know my end,  the measure of my days, what it is. Let me know how frail I am.
Ps. Behold, thou have made my days as handbreadths,  my life-time is as nothing before thee. Surely every man at his best condition is altogether vanity. Selah.
Ps. Surely every man walks in a shadow. Surely they are disquieted in vain. He heaps up,  knows not who shall gather them.
Ps. And now, Lord, what do I wait for? My hope is in thee.
Ps. Deliver me from all my transgressions. Make me not the reproach of the foolish.
Ps. I was mute. I opened not my mouth, because thou did it.
Ps. Remove thy stroke away from me. I am consumed by the blow of thy hand.
Ps. When thou have corrected man with rebukes for iniquity, thou make his beauty to disintegrate like a moth. Surely every man is vanity. Selah.
Ps. Hear my prayer, O Jehovah,  give ear to my cry. Keep not silent at my tears, for I am a stranger with thee, a sojourner, as all my fathers were.
Ps. O spare me, that I may recover strength before I go from here,  be no more.
Ps. I waited patiently for Jehovah,  he inclined to me,  heard my cry.
Ps. He also brought me up out of a horrible pit, out of the miry clay,  he set my feet upon a rock,  established my goings.
Ps. And he has put a new song in my mouth, even praise to our God. Many shall see it,  fear,  shall trust in Jehovah.
Ps. Blessed is the man who makes Jehovah his trust,  respects not the proud, nor such as turn aside to lies.
Ps. Many, O Jehovah my God, are the wonderful works which thou have done,  thy thoughts which are toward us. They cannot be set in order to thee. If I would declare and speak of them, they are more than can be numbered.
Ps. Sacrifice and offering thou did not desire,  a body thou have prepared for me. Whole burnt offering and sacrifice for sin thou did not require.
Ps. Then I said, Lo, I have come. In the volume of a book it is written of me.
Ps. I delight to do thy will, O my God. Yea, thy law is within my heart.
Ps. I have proclaimed glad tidings of righteousness in the great assembly. Lo, I will not refrain my lips. O Jehovah, thou know.
Ps. I have not hid thy righteousness within my heart. I have declared thy faithfulness and thy salvation. I have not concealed thy loving kindness and thy truth from the great assembly.
Ps. Withhold thou not thy tender mercies from me, O Jehovah. Let thy loving kindness and thy truth continually preserve me,
Ps. for innumerable evils have encompassed me around. My iniquities have overtaken me, so that I am not able to look up. They are more than the hairs of my head,  my heart has failed me.
Ps. Be pleased, O Jehovah, to deliver me. Make haste to help me, O Jehovah.
Ps. Let them be put to shame and confounded together who seek after my soul to destroy it. Let them be turned backward and brought to dishonor who delight in my hurt.
Ps. Let them be desolate because of their shame who say to me, Aha, aha.
Ps. Let all those who seek thee rejoice and be glad in thee. Let such as love thy salvation say continually, Jehovah be magnified.
Ps. But I am poor and needy, yet the Lord thinks upon me. Thou are my help and my deliverer. Make no delay, O my God.
Ps. Blessed is he who considers a poor man. Jehovah will deliver him in the day of evil.
Ps. Jehovah will preserve him,  keep him alive,  he shall be blessed upon the earth. And thou do not deliver him to the will of his enemies.
Ps. Jehovah will support him upon the bed of languishing. Thou will make all his bed in his sickness.
Ps. I said, O Jehovah, have mercy upon me. Heal my soul, for I have sinned against thee.
Ps. My enemies speak evil against me, saying, When will he die,  his name perish?
Ps. And if he comes to see me, he speaks falsehood. His heart gathers iniquity to itself. When he goes abroad, he tells it.
Ps. All who hate me whisper together against me. Against me they devise my hurt.
Ps. An evil disease, they say, clings firm to him. And now that he lies he shall rise up no more.
Ps. Yea, my own familiar friend, in whom I trusted, who ate of my bread, has lifted up his heel against me.
Ps. But thou, O Jehovah, have mercy upon me,  raise me up that I may requite them.
Ps. By this I know that thou delight in me, because my enemy does not triumph over me.
Ps. And as for me, thou uphold me in my integrity,  set me before thy face forever.
Ps. Blessed be Jehovah, the God of Israel, from everlasting and to everlasting. Truly,  Truly.
Ps. As the hart pants after the water brooks, so my soul pants after thee, O God.
Ps. My soul thirsts for God, for the living God. When shall I come and appear before God?
Ps. My tears have been my food day and night, while they continually say to me, Where is thy God?
Ps. These things I remember,  pour out my soul within me, how I went with the throng,  led them to the house of God, with the voice of joy and praise, a multitude keeping holyday.
Ps. Why are thou cast down, O my soul? And why are thou disquieted within me? Hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him for the help of his countenance.
Ps. O my God, my soul is cast down within me. Therefore I remember thee from the land of the Jordan,  the Hermons, from the hill Mizar.
Ps. Deep calls to deep at the noise of thy waterfalls. All thy waves and thy billows have gone over me.
Ps. Yet Jehovah will command his loving kindness in the daytime,  in the night his song shall be with me, even a prayer to the God of my life.
Ps. I will say to God my rock, Why have thou forgotten me? Why do I go mourning because of the oppression of the enemy?
Ps. As with a sword in my bones, my adversaries reproach me; while they continually say to me, Where is thy God?
Ps. Why are thou cast down, O my soul? And why are thou disquieted within me? Hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him, the help of my countenance,  my God.
Ps. Judge me, O God,  plead my cause against a profane nation. O deliver me from the deceitful and unjust man.
Ps. For thou are the God of my strength. Why have thou cast me off? Why do I go mourning because of the oppression of the enemy?
Ps. O send out thy light and thy truth. Let them lead me. Let them bring me to thy holy hill,  to thy tabernacles.
Ps. Then I will go to the altar of God, to God my exceeding joy,  I will praise thee upon the harp, O God, my God.
Ps. Why are thou cast down, O my soul? And why are thou disquieted within me? Hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him, the help of my countenance,  my God.
Ps. We have heard with our ears, O God, our fathers have told us, what work thou did in their days, in the days of old.
Ps. Thou drove out the nations with thy hand,  thou planted them. Thou afflicted the peoples,  thou spread them abroad.
Ps. For they did not get the land in possession by their own sword, nor did their own arm save them,  thy right hand,  thine arm,  the light of thy countenance, because thou were favorable to them.
Ps. Thou are my King, O God. Command deliverance for Jacob.
Ps. Through thee we will push down our adversaries. Through thy name we will tread them under who rise up against us.
Ps. For I will not trust in my bow, nor shall my sword save me.
Ps. But thou have saved us from our adversaries,  have put them to shame who hate us.
Ps. In God we have made our boast all the day long,  we will give thanks to thy name forever. Selah.
Ps. But now thou have cast off,  brought us to dishonor,  go not forth with our armies.
Ps. Thou make us to turn back from the adversary. And those who hate us take spoil for themselves.
Ps. Thou have made us like sheep for food,  have scattered us among the nations.
Ps. Thou sell thy people for nothing,  have not increased by their price.
Ps. Thou make us a reproach to our neighbors, a scoffing and a derision to those who are round about us.
Ps. Thou make us a byword among the nations, a shaking of the head among the peoples.
Ps. All the day long my dishonor is before me,  the shame of my face has covered me,
Ps. for the voice of him who reproaches and blasphemes, because of the enemy and the avenger.
Ps. All this has come upon us, yet we have not forgotten thee, nor have we dealt falsely in thy covenant.
Ps. Our heart is not turned back, nor have our steps declined from thy way,
Ps. that thou have greatly broken us in the place of jackals,  covered us with the shadow of death.
Ps. If we have forgotten the name of our God, or spread forth our hands to a strange god,
Ps. will not God search this out? For he knows the secrets of the heart.
Ps. Yea, for thy sake we are killed all the day long. We are accounted as sheep for the slaughter.
Ps. Awake, why do thou sleep, O Lord? Arise, cast not off forever.
Ps. Why do thou hide thy face,  forget our affliction and our oppression?
Ps. For our soul is bowed down to the dust; our body clings to the ground.
Ps. Rise up for our help,  redeem us for thy loving kindness' sake.
Ps. My heart overflows with a good matter. I speak the things which I have made concerning the king. My tongue is the pen of a ready writer.
Ps. Thou are fairer than the sons of men. Grace is poured into thy lips. Therefore God has blessed thee forever.
Ps. Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, O mighty one, thy glory and thy majesty.
Ps. And in thy majesty ride on prosperously because of truth and gentleness and righteousness. And thy right hand shall teach thee awesome things.
Ps. Thine arrows are sharp. The peoples fall under thee. They are in the heart of the king's enemies.
Ps. Thy throne, O God, is forever and ever. A scepter of straightness is the scepter of thy kingdom.
Ps. Thou have loved righteousness,  hated wickedness. Therefore God, thy God, has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy companions.
Ps. All thy garments smell of myrrh,  aloes,  cassia. Out of ivory palaces stringed instruments have made thee glad.
Ps. Kings' daughters are among thy honorable women. At thy right hand stands the queen in gold of Ophir.
Ps. Hearken, O daughter,  consider,  incline thine ear. Forget also thine own people,  thy father's house.
Ps. So will the king desire thy beauty, for he is thy lord,  reverence thou him.
Ps. And the daughter of Tyre shall adore him with a gift. The rich among the people shall entreat thy favor.
Ps. Inside, the king's daughter is all glorious. Her clothing is embroidered with gold.
Ps. She shall be led to the king in broidered work. The virgins, her companions who follow her, shall be brought to thee.
Ps. With gladness and rejoicing they shall be led. They shall enter into the king's palace.
Ps. Instead of thy fathers shall be thy sons, whom thou shall make rulers in all the earth.
Ps. I will make thy name to be remembered in all generations. Therefore the peoples shall give thee thanks forever and ever.
Ps. God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble.
Ps. Therefore we will not fear, though the earth changes,  though the mountains are shaken into the heart of the seas,
Ps. though the waters of it roar and are troubled, though the mountains tremble with the swelling of it. Selah.
Ps. There is a river, the streams of which make the city of God glad, the holy place of the tabernacles of the Most High.
Ps. God is in the midst of her. She shall not be moved. God will help her,  that right early.
Ps. The nations raged, the kingdoms were moved, he uttered his voice, the earth melted.
Ps. Jehovah of hosts is with us. The God of Jacob is our refuge. Selah.
Ps. Come, behold the works of Jehovah, what desolations he has made in the earth.
Ps. He makes wars to cease to the end of the earth. He breaks the bow,  cuts the spear in two. He burns the chariots in the fire.
Ps. Be still,  know that I am God. I will be exalted among the nations. I will be exalted in the earth.
Ps. Jehovah of hosts is with us. The God of Jacob is our refuge. Selah.
Ps. O clap your hands, all ye peoples. Shout to God with the voice of triumph.
Ps. For Jehovah Most High is awesome. He is a great King over all the earth.
Ps. He subdues peoples under us,  nations under our feet.
Ps. He chooses our inheritance for us, the glory of Jacob whom he loved. Selah.
Ps. God has gone up with a shout, Jehovah with the sound of a trumpet.
Ps. Sing praise to God, sing praises. Sing praises to our King, sing praises.
Ps. For God is the King of all the earth. Sing ye praises with understanding.
Ps. God reigns over the nations. God sits upon his holy throne.
Ps. The nobles of the peoples are gathered together, the people of the God of Abraham. For the shields of the earth belong to God. He is greatly exalted.
Ps. Great is Jehovah,  greatly to be praised in the city of our God, in his holy mountain.
Ps. Beautiful in elevation, the joy of the whole earth, is mount Zion, on the sides of the north, the city of the great King.
Ps. God has made himself known in her palaces for a refuge.
Ps. For, lo, the kings assembled themselves. They passed by together.
Ps. They saw it, then were they amazed. They were dismayed, they hastened away.
Ps. Trembling took hold of them there, pain, as of a woman in travail.
Ps. With the east wind thou break the ships of Tarshish.
Ps. As we have heard, so we have seen in the city of Jehovah of hosts, in the city of our God, God will establish it forever. Selah.
Ps. We have thought on thy loving kindness, O God, in the midst of thy temple.
Ps. As is thy name, O God, so is thy praise to the ends of the earth. Thy right hand is full of righteousness.
Ps. Let mount Zion be glad. Let the daughters of Judah rejoice because of thy judgments.
Ps. Walk about Zion,  go round about her. Number the towers of it,
Ps. mark ye well her bulwarks, consider her palaces, that ye may tell it to the generation following.
Ps. For this God is our God forever and ever. He will be our guide even to death.
Ps. Hear this, all ye peoples. Give ear, all ye inhabitants of the world,
Ps. both low and high, rich and poor together.
Ps. My mouth shall speak wisdom,  the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding.
Ps. I will incline my ear to a proverb. I will open my dark saying upon the harp.
Ps. Why should I fear in the days of evil, when iniquity at my heels encompasses me about?
Ps. Those who trust in their wealth,  boast themselves in the multitude of their riches,
Ps. none can by any means redeem his brother, nor give to God a ransom for him
Ps. (for the redemption of their life is costly,  it fails forever),
Ps. that he should still live always, that he should not see corruption.
Ps. For he shall see it. Wise men die. The fool and the brutish alike perish,  leave their wealth to others.
Ps. Their inward thought is that their houses are forever, their dwelling-places to all generations. They call their lands after their own names.
Ps. Even a man in splendor does not abide. He is like the beasts that perish.
Ps. This their way is their folly. Yet after them men approve their sayings. Selah.
Ps. They are appointed as a flock for Sheol. Death shall be their shepherd,  the upright shall have dominion over them in the morning. And their beauty shall be for Sheol to consume, that there be no habitation for it.
Ps. But God will redeem my soul from the power of Sheol, for he will receive me. Selah.
Ps. Be not thou afraid when a man is made rich, when the glory of his house is increased.
Ps. For when he dies he shall carry nothing away. His glory shall not descend after him.
Ps. Though while he lived he blessed his soul (and men praise thee, when thou do well for thyself),
Ps. he shall go to the generation of his fathers. They shall never see the light.
Ps. A man who is in splendor,  understands not, is like the beasts that perish.
Ps. The Mighty One, God, Jehovah, has spoken,  called the earth from the rising of the sun to the going down thereof.
Ps. Out of Zion, the perfection of beauty, God has shone forth.
Ps. Our God comes,  does not keep silence. A fire devours before him,  it is very tempestuous round about him.
Ps. He calls to the heavens above,  to the earth, that he may judge his people.
Ps. Gather my sanctified together to me, those who have made a covenant with me by sacrifice.
Ps. And the heavens shall declare his righteousness, for God is judge himself. Selah.
Ps. Hear, O my people,  I will speak, O Israel,  I will testify to thee, I am God, even thy God.
Ps. I will not reprove thee for thy sacrifices,  thy burnt offerings being continually before me.
Ps. I will take no bullock out of thy house, nor he-goats out of thy folds.
Ps. For every beast of the forest is mine,  the cattle upon a thousand hills.
Ps. I know all the birds of the mountains,  the wild beasts of the field are mine.
Ps. If I were hungry, I would not tell thee, for the world is mine,  the fullness thereof.
Ps. Will I eat the flesh of bulls, or drink the blood of goats?
Ps. Offer to God the sacrifice of thanksgiving,  pay thy vows to the Most High.
Ps. And call upon me in the day of trouble. I will deliver thee,  thou shall glorify me.
Ps. But to the wicked man God says, What have thou to do to declare my statutes,  that thou have taken my covenant in thy mouth,
Ps. since thou hate instruction,  cast my words behind thee?
Ps. When thou saw a thief, thou consented with him,  have been partaker with adulterers.
Ps. Thou give thy mouth to evil,  thy tongue frames deceit.
Ps. Thou sit and speak against thy brother; thou slander thine own mother's son.
Ps. These things thou have done,  I kept silence. Thou thought that I was altogether such a one as thyself. But I will reprove thee,  set them in order before thine eyes.
Ps. Now consider this, ye who forget God, lest I tear you in pieces,  there be none to deliver:
Ps. Whoever offers the sacrifice of thanksgiving glorifies me. And to him who orders his way aright I will show the salvation of God.
Ps. Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy loving kindness. According to the multitude of thy tender mercies blot out my transgressions.
Ps. Wash me thoroughly from my iniquity,  cleanse me from my sin.
Ps. For I know my transgressions,  my sin is ever before me.
Ps. Against thee, thee only, I have sinned,  done that which is evil in thy sight, that thou may be justified when thou speak,  may prevail when thou are criticized.
Ps. Behold, I was brought forth in iniquity,  in sin my mother conceived me.
Ps. Behold, thou desire truth in the inward parts,  in the hidden part thou will make me to know wisdom.
Ps. Purify me with hyssop,  I shall be clean. Wash me,  I shall be whiter than snow.
Ps. Make me to hear joy and gladness, that the bones which thou have broken may rejoice.
Ps. Hide thy face from my sins,  blot out all my iniquities.
Ps. Create in me a clean heart, O God,  renew a right spirit within me.
Ps. Cast me not away from thy presence,  take not thy holy Spirit from me.
Ps. Restore to me the joy of thy salvation,  uphold me with a willing spirit.
Ps. Then I will teach transgressors thy ways,  sinners shall be converted to thee.
Ps. Deliver me from blood guiltiness, O God, thou God of my salvation. And my tongue shall sing aloud of thy righteousness.
Ps. O Lord, open thou my lips,  my mouth shall show forth thy praise.
Ps. For thou delight not in sacrifice, else I would give it. Thou have no pleasure in burnt offering.
Ps. The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit. A broken and contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise.
Ps. Do good in thy good pleasure to Zion. Build thou the walls of Jerusalem.
Ps. Then thou will delight in the sacrifices of righteousness, in burnt offering and in whole burnt offering. Then they will offer bullocks upon thine altar.
Ps. Why boast thou thyself in mischief, O mighty man? The loving kindness of God is continual.
Ps. Thy tongue devises wickedness, like a sharp razor, working deceitfully.
Ps. Thou love evil more than good,  lying rather than to speak righteousness. Selah.
Ps. Thou love all devouring words, O thou deceitful tongue.
Ps. God will likewise destroy thee forever. He will take thee up,  pluck thee out of thy tent,  root thee out of the land of the living. Selah.
Ps. The righteous also shall see,  fear,  shall laugh at him, saying,
Ps. Lo, this is the man who did not make God his strength,  trusted in the abundance of his riches,  strengthened himself in his wickedness.
Ps. But as for me, I am like a green olive tree in the house of God. I trust in the loving kindness of God forever and ever.
Ps. I will give thee thanks forever, because thou have done it. And I will hope in thy name in the presence of thy sanctified, for it is good.
Ps. The fool has said in his heart, There is no God. Corrupt are they,  have done abominable iniquity. There is none who does good.
Ps. God looked down from heaven upon the sons of men, to see if there were any who understood, who seek after God.
Ps. Every one of them has gone back. They have together become filthy. There is none who does good, no, not one.
Ps. Have the workers of iniquity no knowledge, who eat up my people as they eat bread,  call not upon God?
Ps. There they were in great fear, where no fear was, for God has scattered the bones of him who encamps against thee. Thou have put them to shame because God has rejected them.
Ps. O that the salvation of Israel came out of Zion! When God brings back the captivity of his people, then Jacob shall rejoice,  Israel shall be glad.
Ps. Save me, O God, by thy name,  judge me in thy might.
Ps. Hear my prayer, O God. Give ear to the words of my mouth.
Ps. For strangers are risen up against me,  violent men have sought after my soul. They have not set God before them. Selah.
Ps. Behold, God is my helper. The Lord is of those who uphold my soul.
Ps. He will requite the evil to my enemies. Destroy thou them in thy truth.
Ps. With a freewill offering I will sacrifice to thee. I will give thanks to thy name, O Jehovah, for it is good.
Ps. For he has delivered me out of all trouble,  my eye has seen it upon my enemies.
Ps. Give ear to my prayer, O God,  hide not thyself from my supplication.
Ps. Attend to me,  answer me. I am restless in my complaint,  moan,
Ps. because of the voice of the enemy, because of the oppression of the wicked. For they cast iniquity upon me,  in anger they persecute me.
Ps. My heart is greatly pained within me,  the terrors of death have fallen upon me.
Ps. Fearfulness and trembling have come upon me,  horror has overwhelmed me.
Ps. And I said, O that I had wings like a dove! Then I would fly away,  be at rest.
Ps. Lo, then I would wander far off. I would lodge in the wilderness. Selah.
Ps. I would hasten myself to a shelter from the stormy wind and tempest.
Ps. Destroy, O Lord, divide their tongue, for I have seen violence and strife in the city.
Ps. Day and night they go about it, upon the walls of it. Iniquity and mischief also are in the midst of it.
Ps. Wickedness is in the midst of it. Oppression and deceit depart not from its streets.
Ps. For it was not an enemy who reproached me. Then I could have borne it. Neither was it he who hated me that magnified himself against me. Then I would have hid myself from him.
Ps. But it was thou, a man my equal, my companion,  my familiar friend.
Ps. We took sweet counsel together. We walked in the house of God with the throng.
Ps. Let death come suddenly upon them. Let them go down alive into Sheol. For wickedness is in their dwelling, in the midst of them.
Ps. As for me, I will call upon God,  Jehovah will save me.
Ps. Evening,  morning,  at noonday, I will complain and moan. And he will hear my voice.
Ps. He has redeemed my soul in peace from the battle that was against me, for there were many by me.
Ps. God will hear,  respond to them, (even he who abides of old), Selah, men who have no changes,  who fear not God.
Ps. He has put forth his hands against such as were at peace with him. He has profaned his covenant.
Ps. His mouth was smooth as butter,  his heart was war. His words were softer than oil, yet they were drawn swords.
Ps. (Cast thy burden upon Jehovah,  he will sustain thee. He will never allow the righteous man to be moved.)
Ps. But thou, O God, will bring them down into the pit of destruction. Bloodthirsty and deceitful men shall not live out half their days,  I will trust in thee.
Ps. Be merciful to me, O God, for man would swallow me up. Fighting all the day long he oppresses me.
Ps. My enemies would swallow me up all the day long, for they are many who fight proudly against me.
Ps. What time I am afraid, I will put my trust in thee.
Ps. In God I will praise his word. In God I have put my trust. I will not be afraid. What can flesh do to me?
Ps. All the day long they wrest my words. All their thoughts are against me for evil.
Ps. They gather themselves together. They hide themselves. They mark my steps, even as they have waited for my soul.
Ps. Shall they escape by iniquity? In anger cast down the peoples, O God.
Ps. Thou number my wanderings. Put thou my tears into thy bottle. Are they not in thy book?
Ps. Then shall my enemies turn back in the day that I call. This I know, that God is for me.
Ps. In God I will praise his word. In Jehovah I will praise his word.
Ps. In God I have put my trust. I will not be afraid. What can man do to me?
Ps. Thy vows are upon me, O God. I will render thank offerings to thee.
Ps. For thou have delivered my soul from death,  my feet from falling, that I may walk before God in the light of the living.
Ps. Be merciful to me, O God, be merciful to me, for my soul takes refuge in thee. Yea, in the shadow of thy wings I will take refuge until calamities be passed by.
Ps. I will cry to God Most High, to God who performs for me.
Ps. He will send from heaven,  save me from the reproach of him who would swallow me up. Selah. God will send forth his loving kindness and his truth.
Ps. My soul is among lions. I lie among those who are set on fire, even the sons of men, whose teeth are spears and arrows,  their tongue a sharp sword.
Ps. Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens, thy glory above all the earth.
Ps. They have prepared a net for my steps. My soul is bowed down. They have dug a pit before me. They are fallen into the midst of it themselves. Selah.
Ps. My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed. I will sing, yea, I will sing praises.
Ps. Awake up, my glory. Awake, psaltery and harp. I myself will awake right early.
Ps. I will give thanks to thee, O Lord, among the peoples. I will sing praises to thee among the nations.
Ps. For thy loving kindness is great to the heavens,  thy truth to the skies.
Ps. Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens, thy glory above all the earth.
Ps. Do ye indeed speak righteousness in silence? Do ye judge uprightly, O ye sons of men?
Ps. No! In heart ye work wickedness. Ye weigh out the violence of your hands in the earth.
Ps. The wicked are estranged from the womb. They go astray as soon as they are born, speaking lies.
Ps. Their poison is like the poison of a serpent, like the deaf adder that stops her ear,
Ps. which hearkens not to the voice of charmers, charming ever so wisely.
Ps. Break their teeth, O God, in their mouth. Break out the great teeth of the young lions, O Jehovah.
Ps. Let them melt away as water that runs with haste. When he aims his arrows, let them be as though they were cut off,
Ps. as a snail which melts and passes away, as the untimely birth of a woman, that has not seen the sun.
Ps. Before your pots can feel the thorns, he will take them away with a whirlwind, the green and the burning alike.
Ps. A righteous man shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance. He shall wash his feet in the blood of the wicked,
Ps. so that men shall say, Truly there is a reward for the righteous man. Truly there is a God who judges in the earth.
Ps. Deliver me from my enemies, O my God. Set me on high from those who rise up against me.
Ps. Deliver me from the workers of iniquity,  save me from the bloodthirsty men.
Ps. For, lo, they lie in wait for my soul. The mighty gather themselves together against me, not for my transgression, nor for my sin, O Jehovah.
Ps. They run and prepare themselves without my fault. Awake thou to help me,  behold.
Ps. Even thou, O Jehovah God of hosts, the God of Israel, arise to visit all the nations. Be not merciful to any wicked transgressors. Selah.
Ps. They return at evening. They howl like a dog,  go round about the city.
Ps. Behold, they belch out with their mouth. Swords are in their lips, for they say, Who hears?
Ps. But thou, O Jehovah, will laugh at them. Thou will have all the nations in derision.
Ps. O my strength, I will give heed to thee, for God is my high tower.
Ps. My God with his loving kindness will meet me. God will let me look upon my enemies.
Ps. Kill them not, lest my people forget. Scatter them by thy power,  bring them down, O Lord our shield,
Ps. for the sin of their mouth,  the words of their lips. Let them even be taken in their pride,  for cursing and lying which they speak.
Ps. Consume them in wrath, consume them, so that they shall be no more. And let them know that God rules in Jacob, to the ends of the earth. Selah.
Ps. And at evening let them return, let them howl like a dog,  go round about the city.
Ps. They shall wander up and down for food,  tarry all night if they be not satisfied.
Ps. But I will sing of thy strength. Yea, I will sing aloud of thy loving kindness in the morning. For thou have been my high tower,  a refuge in the day of my distress.
Ps. To thee, O my strength, I will sing praises. For God is my high tower, the God of my mercy.
Ps. O God thou have cast us off. Thou have broken us down. Thou have been angry. O restore us again.
Ps. Thou have made the land to tremble. Thou have torn it. Heal the breaking of it, for it shakes.
Ps. Thou have shown thy people hard things. Thou have made us to drink the wine of staggering.
Ps. Thou have given a banner to those who fear thee, that it may be displayed because of the truth. Selah.
Ps. That thy beloved ones may be delivered, save with thy right hand,  answer us.
Ps. God has spoken in his holiness. I will exult. I will divide Shechem,  mete out the valley of Succoth.
Ps. Gilead is mine,  Manasseh is mine. Ephraim also is the defense of my head. Judah is my scepter.
Ps. Moab is my wash pot. Upon Edom I will cast my shoe. Philistia, shout thou because of me.
Ps. Who will bring me into the strong city? Who has led me to Edom?
Ps. Have not thou, O God, cast us off? And thou go not forth, O God, with our armies.
Ps. Give us help against the adversary, for vain is the help of man.
Ps. Through God we shall do valiantly, for he it is who will tread down our adversaries.
Ps. Hear my cry, O God. Attend to my prayer.
Ps. From the end of the earth I will call to thee when my heart is overwhelmed. Lead me to the rock that is higher than I.
Ps. For thou have been a refuge for me, a strong tower from the enemy.
Ps. I will dwell in thy tabernacle forever. I will take refuge in the covert of thy wings. Selah.
Ps. For thou, O God, have heard my vows. Thou have given me the heritage of those who fear thy name.
Ps. Thou will prolong the king's life. His years shall be as many generations.
Ps. He shall abide before God forever. O prepare loving kindness and truth that they may preserve him.
Ps. So I will sing praise to thy name forever, that I may daily perform my vows.
Ps. My soul waits in silence for God only. From him is my salvation.
Ps. He only is my rock and my salvation, my high tower. I shall not be greatly moved.
Ps. How long will ye set upon a man, that ye may kill, all of you, like a leaning wall, like a tottering fence?
Ps. They only consult to thrust him down from his dignity. They delight in lies. They bless with their mouth,  they curse inwardly. Selah.
Ps. My soul, wait thou in silence for God only, for my expectation is from him.
Ps. He only is my rock and my salvation, my high tower. I shall not be moved.
Ps. With God is my salvation and my glory. The rock of my strength,  my refuge, is in God.
Ps. Trust in him at all times, ye people. Pour out your heart before him. God is a refuge for us. Selah.
Ps. Surely men of low degree are vanity,  men of high degree are a lie. In the balances they will go up. They are together lighter than vanity.
Ps. Trust not in oppression,  become not vain in robbery. If riches increase, set not your heart on it.
Ps. God has spoken once, twice I have heard this, that power belongs to God.
Ps. Also to thee, O Lord, belongs loving kindness, for thou render to every man according to his work.
Ps. O God, thou are my God. I will earnestly seek thee. My soul thirsts for thee, my flesh longs for thee, in a dry and weary land, where is no water.
Ps. So I have looked upon thee in the sanctuary to see thy power and thy glory.
Ps. Because thy loving kindness is better than life, my lips shall praise thee.
Ps. So I will bless thee while I live. I will lift up my hands in thy name.
Ps. My soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatness. And my mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips
Ps. when I remember thee upon my bed,  meditate on thee in the night-watches.
Ps. For thou have been my help,  in the shadow of thy wings I will rejoice.
Ps. My soul follows close after thee. Thy right hand upholds me.
Ps. But those who seek my soul, to destroy it, shall go into the lower parts of the earth.
Ps. They shall be given over to the power of the sword. They shall be a portion for foxes.
Ps. But the king shall rejoice in God. Everyone who swears by him shall glory, for the mouth of those who speak lies shall be stopped.
Ps. Hear my voice, O God, in my complaint. Preserve my life from fear of the enemy.
Ps. Hide me from the secret counsel of evildoers, from the tumult of the workers of iniquity,
Ps. who have whet their tongue like a sword,  have aimed their arrows, even bitter words,
Ps. that they may shoot in secret places at a blameless man. Suddenly do they shoot at him,  fear not.
Ps. They encourage themselves in an evil purpose. They converse of laying snares secretly. They say, Who will see them?
Ps. They search out iniquities, saying, We have accomplished a diligent search. And the inward part of man and the heart are deep.
Ps. But God will shoot at them. With an arrow they shall suddenly be wounded.
Ps. So they shall be made to stumble, their own tongue being against them. All who see them shall wag the head.
Ps. And all men shall fear. And they shall declare the work of God,  shall wisely consider of his doing.
Ps. A righteous man shall be glad in Jehovah,  shall take refuge in him. And all the upright in heart shall glory.
Ps. Praise waits for thee, O God, in Zion. And to thee the vow shall be performed.
Ps. O thou who hear prayer, to thee all flesh shall come.
Ps. Iniquities prevail against me. As for our transgressions, thou will forgive them.
Ps. Blessed is the man whom thou choose and cause to approach, that he may dwell in thy courts. We shall be satisfied with the goodness of thy house, thy holy temple.
Ps. By awesome things thou will answer us in righteousness, O God of our salvation, thou who are the confidence of all the ends of the earth,  of those who are afar off upon the sea,
Ps. who by his strength sets firm the mountains, being girded about with might,
Ps. who stills the roaring of the seas, the roaring of their waves,  the tumult of the peoples.
Ps. They also who dwell in the outermost parts are afraid at thy signs. Thou make the outgoings of the morning and evening to rejoice.
Ps. Thou visit the earth,  water it; thou greatly enrich it. The river of God is full of water. Thou provide them grain when thou have so prepared the earth.
Ps. Thou water its furrows abundantly. Thou settle the ridges of it. Thou make it soft with showers. Thou bless the springing of it.
Ps. Thou crown the year with thy goodness,  thy paths drop fatness.
Ps. They drop upon the pastures of the wilderness,  the hills are girded with joy.
Ps. The pastures are clothed with flocks. The valleys also are covered over with grain. They shout for joy; they also sing.
Ps. Make a joyful noise to God, all the earth.
Ps. Sing forth the glory of his name. Make his praise glorious.
Ps. Say to God, How awesome are thy works! Through the greatness of thy power thine enemies shall submit themselves to thee.
Ps. All the earth shall worship thee,  shall sing to thee. They shall sing to thy name. Selah.
Ps. Come,  see the works of God, awesome in actions toward the sons of men.
Ps. He turned the sea into dry land. They went through the river on foot. There we rejoiced in him.
Ps. He rules by his might forever. His eyes observe the nations. Let not the rebellious exalt themselves. Selah.
Ps. O bless our God, ye peoples,  make the voice of his praise to be heard,
Ps. who holds our soul in life,  does not allow our feet to be moved.
Ps. For thou, O God, have proved us. Thou have tried us as silver is tried.
Ps. Thou brought us into the net. Thou laid a great burden upon our loins.
Ps. Thou caused men to ride over our heads. We went through fire and through water. But thou brought us out into a wealthy place.
Ps. I will come into thy house with burnt offerings. I will pay thee my vows,
Ps. which my lips uttered,  my mouth spoke, when I was in distress.
Ps. I will offer to thee burnt offerings of fatlings, with the incense of rams. I will offer bullocks with goats. Selah.
Ps. Come,  hear, all ye who fear God,  I will declare what he has done for my soul.
Ps. I cried to him with my mouth,  he was extolled with my tongue.
Ps. If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear.
Ps. But truly God has heard. He has attended to the voice of my prayer.
Ps. Blessed be God, who has not turned away my prayer, nor his loving kindness from me.
Ps. God be merciful to us,  bless us,  cause his face to shine upon us (Selah),
Ps. that thy way may be known upon earth, thy salvation among all nations.
Ps. Let the peoples praise thee, O God. Let all the peoples praise thee.
Ps. O let the nations be glad and sing for joy. For thou will judge the peoples with equity,  govern the nations upon earth. Selah.
Ps. Let the peoples praise thee, O God. Let all the peoples praise thee.
Ps. The earth has yielded its increase. God, even our own God, will bless us.
Ps. God will bless us,  all the ends of the earth shall fear him.
Ps. Let God arise, let his enemies be scattered. Let also those who hate him flee before him.
Ps. As smoke is driven away, so drive them away. As wax melts before the fire, so let the wicked perish at the presence of God.
Ps. But let the righteous be glad. Let them exult before God. Yea, let them rejoice with gladness.
Ps. Sing to God, sing praises to his name. Cast up a highway for him who rides through the deserts. His name is Jehovah,  exult ye before him.
Ps. A father of the fatherless,  a judge of the widows, is God in his holy habitation.
Ps. God sets the lonely in families. He brings out the prisoners into prosperity,  the rebellious dwell in a parched land.
Ps. O God, when thou went forth before thy people, when thou marched through the wilderness (Selah)
Ps. the earth trembled, the heavens also dropped at the presence of God, Sinai at the presence of God, the God of Israel.
Ps. Thou, O God, sent a plentiful rain. Thou confirmed thine inheritance when it was weary.
Ps. Thy congregation dwelt in it. Thou, O God, prepared for the poor from thy goodness.
Ps. The Lord gave the word. Great was the company of those who published it.
Ps. Kings of armies fled quickly,  she who remained at home divided the spoil.
Ps. Though ye lie between two boundaries, it is as the wings of a dove covered with silver,  her pinions with yellow gold.
Ps. When the Almighty scattered kings in it, it was as it snows in Zalmon.
Ps. A mountain of God is the mountain of Bashan; a high mountain is the mountain of Bashan.
Ps. Why look ye askance, ye high mountains, at the mountain which God has desired for his abode? Yea, Jehovah will dwell in it forever.
Ps. The chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands upon thousands. The Lord is among them, as in Sinai, in the sanctuary.
Ps. Thou have ascended on high. Thou have led captivity captive. Thou have received gifts among men, yea, among the rebellious also, that Jehovah God might dwell with them.
Ps. Blessed be the Lord, who bears our burden daily, even the God who is our salvation. Selah.
Ps. God is to us a God of deliverances,  escape from death belongs to Jehovah the Lord.
Ps. But God will smite through the head of his enemies, the hairy scalp of him who still goes in his guiltiness.
Ps. The Lord said, I will bring again from Bashan. I will bring again from the depths of the sea,
Ps. that thou may dash thy foot in blood, that the tongue of thy dogs may have its portion from enemies.
Ps. They have seen thy goings, O God, even the goings of my God, my King, into the sanctuary.
Ps. The singers went before, the minstrels followed after, in the midst of the damsels playing with timbrels.
Ps. Bless ye God in the congregations, the lord of the fountain of Israel.
Ps. There is little Benjamin their ruler, the rulers of Judah and their council, the rulers of Zebulun, the rulers of Naphtali.
Ps. Thy God has commanded thy strength. Strengthen, O God, that which thou have wrought for us.
Ps. Because of thy temple at Jerusalem kings shall bring presents to thee.
Ps. Rebuke the wild beast of the reeds, the multitude of the bulls, with the calves of the peoples, trampling under foot the pieces of silver. He has scattered the peoples that delight in war.
Ps. Rulers shall come out of Egypt. Ethiopia shall hasten to stretch out her hands to God.
Ps. Sing to God, ye kingdoms of the earth. O sing praises to the Lord (Selah),
Ps. to him who rides upon the heaven of heavens, which are of old. Lo, he utters his voice, a mighty voice.
Ps. Ascribe ye strength to God. His excellency is over Israel,  his strength is in the skies.
Ps. O God, awesome out of thy holy places, the God of Israel, he gives strength and power to his people. Blessed be God.
Ps. Save me, O God, for the waters have come in to my soul.
Ps. I sink in deep mire where there is no standing. I have come into deep waters, where the floods overflow me.
Ps. I am weary with my crying. My throat is dried. My eyes fail while I wait for my God.
Ps. Those who hate me without a cause are more than the hairs of my head. Those who would cut me off, being my enemies wrongfully, are mighty. That which I took not away I have to restore.
Ps. O God, thou know my foolishness,  my sins are not hid from thee.
Ps. Let not those who wait for thee be put to shame through me, O lord Jehovah of hosts. Let not those who seek thee be brought to dishonor through me, O God of Israel.
Ps. Because for thy sake I have borne reproach, shame has covered my face.
Ps. I have become a stranger to my brothers,  an alien to my mother's sons.
Ps. For the zeal of thy house has eaten me up,  the reproaches of those who reproach thee have fallen upon me.
Ps. When I wept in my soul with fasting, that was to my reproach.
Ps. When I made sackcloth my clothing, I became a byword to them.
Ps. Those who sit in the gate talk of me,  I am the song of the drunkards.
Ps. But as for me, my prayer is to thee, O Jehovah. In an acceptable time, O God, in the abundance of thy loving kindness, answer me in the truth of thy salvation.
Ps. Deliver me out of the mire,  let me not sink. Let me be delivered from those who hate me,  out of the deep waters.
Ps. Let not the water flood overwhelm me, nor let the deep swallow me up. And let not the pit shut its mouth upon me.
Ps. Answer me, O Jehovah, for thy loving kindness is good. According to the multitude of thy tender mercies turn thou to me,
Ps. and hide not thy face from thy servant, for I am in distress. Answer me speedily.
Ps. Draw near to my soul,  redeem it. Ransom me because of my enemies.
Ps. Thou know my reproach,  my shame,  my dishonor. My adversaries are all before thee.
Ps. Reproach has broken my heart,  I am full of heaviness. And I looked for some to take pity,  there was none,  for comforters,  I found none.
Ps. They also gave me gall for my food,  in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink.
Ps. Let their table before them become a snare,  when they are in peace, a trap,  for a stumbling block,  for a retribution to them.
Ps. Let their eyes be darkened, so that they cannot see,  bow down their back continually.
Ps. Pour out thine indignation upon them,  let the fierceness of thine anger overtake them.
Ps. Let their habitation be desolate. Let none dwell in their tents.
Ps. For they persecute him whom thou have smitten,  they tell of the sorrow of those whom thou have wounded.
Ps. Add iniquity to their iniquity,  let them not come into thy righteousness.
Ps. Let them be blotted out of the book of life,  not be written with the righteous.
Ps. But I am poor and sorrowful. Let thy salvation, O God, set me up on high.
Ps. I will praise the name of God with a song,  will magnify him with thanksgiving,
Ps. and it will please Jehovah better than an ox, or a bullock that has horns and hoofs.
Ps. The meek have seen it,  are glad. Ye who seek after God, let your heart live.
Ps. For Jehovah hears the needy,  does not despise his prisoners.
Ps. Let heaven and earth praise him, the seas,  everything that moves therein.
Ps. For God will save Zion,  build the cities of Judah. And they shall abide there,  have it in possession.
Ps. The seed also of his servants shall inherit it,  those who love his name shall dwell therein.
Ps. Hasten, O God, to deliver me. Make haste to help me, O Jehovah.
Ps. Let them be put to shame and confounded who seek after my soul. Let them be turned backward and brought to dishonor who delight in my hurt.
Ps. Let them be turned back because of their shame who say, Aha, aha.
Ps. Let all those who seek thee rejoice and be glad in thee. And let such as love thy salvation say continually, Let God be magnified.
Ps. But I am poor and needy. Make haste to me, O God. Thou are my help and my deliverer, O Jehovah. Delay thou not.
Ps. In thee, O Jehovah, do I take refuge. Let me never be put to shame.
Ps. Deliver me in thy righteousness,  rescue me. Bow down thine ear to me,  save me.
Ps. Be thou to me a rock of habitation to which I may continually resort. Thou have given commandment to save me, for thou are my rock and my fortress.
Ps. Rescue me, O my God, out of the hand of a wicked man, out of the hand of an unrighteous and cruel man.
Ps. For thou are my hope, O lord Jehovah, my trust from my youth.
Ps. By thee I have been held up from the womb. Thou are he who took me out of my mother's bowels. My praise shall be continually of thee.
Ps. I am as a wonder to many,  thou are my strong refuge.
Ps. My mouth shall be filled with thy praise,  with thy honor all the day.
Ps. Cast me not off in the time of old age. Forsake me not when my strength fails.
Ps. For my enemies speak concerning me,  those who watch for my soul take counsel together,
Ps. saying, God has forsaken him. Pursue and take him, for there is none to deliver.
Ps. O God, be not far from me. O my God, make haste to help me.
Ps. Let them be put to shame and consumed who are adversaries to my soul. Let them be covered with reproach and dishonor who seek my hurt.
Ps. But I will hope continually,  will praise thee yet more and more.
Ps. My mouth shall tell of thy righteousness, of thy salvation all the day, for I know not the numbers.
Ps. I will come with the mighty acts of the lord Jehovah. I will make mention of thy righteousness, even of thine only.
Ps. O God, thou have taught me from my youth,  I have declared thy wondrous works until now.
Ps. Yea, even when I am old and gray headed, O God, forsake me not, until I have declared thy strength to a generation, thy might to everyone who is to come.
Ps. Thy righteousness also, O God, is very high, thou who have done great things. O God, who is like thee?
Ps. Thou, who have shown us many and great troubles, will revive us again,  will bring us up again from the depths of the earth.
Ps. Increase thou my greatness,  turn again and comfort me.
Ps. I will also praise thee with the psaltery, even thy truth, O my God. To thee I will sing praises with the harp, O thou Holy One of Israel.
Ps. My lips shall shout for joy when I sing praises to thee,  my soul, which thou have redeemed.
Ps. My tongue also shall talk of thy righteousness all the day long. For they are put to shame, for they are confounded, who seek my hurt.
Ps. Give the king thy judgments, O God,  thy righteousness to the king's son.
Ps. He will judge thy people with righteousness,  thy poor with justice.
Ps. The mountains shall bring peace to the people,  the hills, in righteousness.
Ps. He will judge the poor of the people. He will save the sons of the needy,  will break in pieces the oppressor.
Ps. They shall fear thee while the sun endures,  as long as the moon, throughout all generations.
Ps. He will come down like rain upon the mown grass, as showers that water the earth.
Ps. In his days righteousness shall flourish,  abundance of peace, till the moon is no more.
Ps. He shall also have dominion from sea to sea,  from the River to the ends of the earth.
Ps. Those who dwell in the wilderness shall bow before him,  his enemies shall lick the dust.
Ps. The kings of Tarshish and of the isles shall render tribute. The kings of Sheba and Seba shall offer gifts.
Ps. Yea, all kings shall fall down before him. All nations shall serve him.
Ps. For he will deliver a needy man when he cries,  a poor man, who has no helper.
Ps. He will have pity on a poor and needy man,  he will save the souls of the needy.
Ps. He will redeem their soul from oppression and violence. And their blood will be precious in his sight,
Ps. and they shall live. And to him shall be given of the gold of Sheba. And men shall pray for him continually. They shall bless him all the day long.
Ps. There shall be abundance of grain in the earth upon the top of the mountains. The fruit of it shall shake like Lebanon. And they of the city shall flourish like grass of the earth.
Ps. His name shall endure forever. His name shall be continued as long as the sun. And men shall be blessed in him. All nations shall call him blessed.
Ps. Blessed be Jehovah God, the God of Israel, who alone does wondrous things.
Ps. And blessed be his glorious name forever. And let the whole earth be filled with his glory. Truly,  Truly.
Ps. The prayers of David the son of Jesse are ended.
Ps. Surely God is good to Israel, to such as are pure in heart.
Ps. But as for me, my feet were almost gone. My steps had well nigh slipped.
Ps. For I was envious of the arrogant when I saw the prosperity of the wicked.
Ps. For there are no pangs in their death,  their strength is firm.
Ps. They are not in trouble as other men, nor are they plagued like other men.
Ps. Therefore pride is as a chain around their neck. Violence covers them as a garment.
Ps. Their eyes stand out with fatness. They have more than heart could wish.
Ps. They scoff,  in wickedness utter oppression. They speak loftily.
Ps. They have set their mouth in the heavens,  their tongue walks through the earth.
Ps. Therefore his people return here,  waters of a full cup are drained by them.
Ps. And they say, How does God know? And is there knowledge in the Most High?
Ps. Behold, these are the wicked,  those who always prosper. They have possessed wealth.
Ps. Surely in vain I have cleansed my heart,  washed my hands in innocence,
Ps. for all the day long I have been plagued,  chastened every morning.
Ps. If I had said, I will speak thus, behold, I would have dealt treacherously with the generation of thy sons.
Ps. When I thought how I might understand this, it was too painful for me,
Ps. until I went into the sanctuary of God,  considered their latter end.
Ps. Surely thou set them in slippery places. Thou cast them down to destruction.
Ps. How they have become a desolation in a moment! They are utterly consumed with terrors.
Ps. As a dream from awakening, O Lord, when thou waken, thou will despise their form.
Ps. For my soul was grieved,  I was pricked in my heart.
Ps. So I was brutish,  ignorant. I was a beast before thee.
Ps. Nevertheless I am continually with thee. Thou have held my right hand.
Ps. Thou will guide me with thy counsel,  afterward receive me to glory.
Ps. Whom have I in heaven? And there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee.
Ps. My flesh and my heart fails,  God is the strength of my heart and my portion forever.
Ps. For, lo, those who are far from thee shall perish. Thou have destroyed all those who go a whoring from thee.
Ps. But it is good for me to draw near to God. I have made the lord Jehovah my refuge, that I may tell of all thy works.
Ps. O God, why have thou cast off forever? Why does thine anger smoke against the sheep of thy pasture?
Ps. Remember thy congregation, which thou have gotten of old, which thou have redeemed to be the tribe of thine inheritance,  mount Zion, at which thou have dwelt.
Ps. Lift up thy feet to the perpetual ruins, all the evil that the enemy has done in the sanctuary.
Ps. Thine adversaries have roared in the midst of thine assembly. They have set up their ensigns for signs.
Ps. They seemed as men who lifted up axes upon a thicket of trees.
Ps. And now they break down all the carved work of it with hatchet and hammers.
Ps. They have set thy sanctuary on fire. They have profaned the dwelling-place of thy name to the ground.
Ps. They said in their heart, Let us make havoc of them altogether. They have burned up all the meeting-places of God in the land.
Ps. We do not see our signs. There is no more any prophet, nor is there among us he who knows how long.
Ps. How long, O God, shall the adversary reproach? Shall the enemy blaspheme thy name forever?
Ps. Why do thou draw back thy hand, even thy right hand? Remove it from the midst of thy bosom.
Ps. Yet God is my King of old, working salvation in the midst of the earth.
Ps. Thou divided the sea by thy strength. Thou break the heads of the sea-monsters in the waters.
Ps. Thou break the heads of leviathan in pieces. Thou gave him to be food to the people inhabiting the wilderness.
Ps. Thou split fountain and flood. Thou dried up mighty rivers.
Ps. The day is thine; the night is also thine. Thou have prepared the light and the sun.
Ps. Thou have set all the borders of the earth. Thou have made summer and winter.
Ps. Remember this, that the enemy has reproached, O Jehovah,  that a foolish people has blasphemed thy name.
Ps. O deliver not the soul of thy turtle-dove to the wild beast. Forget not the life of thy poor forever.
Ps. Have respect to the covenant, for the dark places of the earth are full of the habitations of violence.
Ps. O let not he who is oppressed return ashamed. Let a poor and needy man praise thy name.
Ps. Arise, O God, plead thine own cause. Remember how the foolish man reproaches thee all the day.
Ps. Forget not the voice of thine adversaries. The tumult of those who rise up against thee ascends continually.
Ps. We give thanks to thee, O God. We give thanks, for thy name is near. Men tell of thy wondrous works.
Ps. When I shall find the set time, I will judge uprightly;
Ps. when the earth and all the inhabitants thereof are dissolved. I have set up the pillars of it. Selah.
Ps. I said to the arrogant, Deal not arrogantly,  to the wicked, Lift not up the horn.
Ps. Lift not up your horn on high. Speak not with a stiff neck.
Ps. For neither from the east, nor from the west, nor yet from the south, comes lifting up.
Ps. But God is the judge. He put one down,  lifts another up.
Ps. For in the hand of Jehovah there is a cup,  the wine foams. It is full of mixture,  he pours out of the same, surely to the dregs of it. All the wicked of the earth shall drain them,  drink them.
Ps. But I will declare forever. I will sing praises to the God of Jacob.
Ps. All the horns of the wicked I will also cut off,  the horns of a righteous man shall be lifted up.
Ps. In Judah God is known. His name is great in Israel.
Ps. In Salem also is his tabernacle,  his dwelling-place in Zion.
Ps. There he broke the arrows of the bow, the shield,  the sword,  the battle. Selah.
Ps. Thou are more glorious and excellent than the mountains of prey.
Ps. The stouthearted are made a spoil. They have slept their sleep,  none of the men of might have found their hands.
Ps. At thy rebuke, O God of Jacob, both chariot and horse are cast into a deep sleep.
Ps. Thou, even thou, are to be feared. And who may stand in thy sight when once thou are angry?
Ps. Thou caused sentence to be heard from heaven. The earth feared and was still
Ps. when God arose to judgment, to save all the meek of the earth. Selah.
Ps. Surely the inward thought of man shall praise thee, even the residue of inward thought will observe a festival to thee.
Ps. Vow,  pay to Jehovah your God. Let all who are round about him bring presents to him who ought to be feared.
Ps. He will cut off the spirit of rulers. He is fearful to the kings of the earth.
Ps. I will cry to God with my voice, even to God with my voice,  he will give ear to me.
Ps. In the day of my trouble I sought the Lord. My hand was stretched out in the night,  slacked not. My soul refused to be comforted.
Ps. I remember God,  am disquieted. I complain,  my spirit is overwhelmed. Selah.
Ps. Thou have held my eyelids watching. I am so troubled that I cannot speak.
Ps. I have considered the days of old, the years of ancient times.
Ps. I call to remembrance my song in the night. I commune with my own heart,  my spirit makes diligent search.
Ps. Will the Lord cast off forever? And will he be favorable no more?
Ps. Has his loving kindness entirely gone forever? Does his promise fail for evermore?
Ps. Has God forgotten to be gracious? Has he in anger shut up his tender mercies? Selah.
Ps. And I said, This is my infirmity, the change of the right hand of the Most High.
Ps. I will make mention of the deeds of Jehovah, for I will remember thy wonders of old.
Ps. I will meditate also upon all thy work,  muse on thy doings.
Ps. Thy way, O God, is in the sanctuary. Who is a great god like God?
Ps. Thou are the God who does wonders. Thou have made known thy strength among the peoples.
Ps. With thine arm thou have redeemed thy people, the sons of Jacob and Joseph. Selah.
Ps. The waters saw thee, O God, the waters saw thee. They were afraid. The depths also trembled.
Ps. The clouds poured out water. The skies sent out a sound. Thine arrows also went abroad.
Ps. The voice of thy thunder was in the whirlwind. The lightnings lightened the world. The earth trembled and shook.
Ps. Thy way was in the sea,  thy paths in the great waters. And thy footsteps were not known.
Ps. Thou led thy people like a flock by the hand of Moses and Aaron.
Ps. Give ear, O my people, to my law. Incline your ears to the words of my mouth.
Ps. I will open my mouth in parables. I will utter dark sayings of old,
Ps. which we have heard and known,  our fathers have told us.
Ps. We will not hide them from their sons, telling to the generation to come the praises of Jehovah,  his strength,  his wondrous works that he has done.
Ps. For he established a testimony in Jacob,  appointed a law in Israel, which he commanded our fathers, that they should make them known to their sons,
Ps. that the generation to come might know, even the sons who should be born, who should arise and tell to their sons,
Ps. that they might set their hope in God,  not forget the works of God,  keep his commandments,
Ps. and might not be as their fathers: a stubborn and rebellious generation, a generation that set not their heart aright,  whose spirit was not steadfast with God.
Ps. The sons of Ephraim, being armed and carrying bows, turned back in the day of battle.
Ps. They kept not the covenant of God,  refused to walk in his law.
Ps. And they forgot his doings,  his wondrous works that he had shown them.
Ps. He did marvelous things in the sight of their fathers, in the land of Egypt, in the field of Zoan.
Ps. He divided the sea,  caused them to pass through. And he made the waters to stand as a heap.
Ps. In the daytime also he led them with a cloud,  all the night with a light of fire.
Ps. He split rocks in the wilderness,  gave them drink abundantly as out of the depths.
Ps. He brought streams also out of the rock,  caused waters to run down like rivers.
Ps. Yet they went on to still sin against him, to rebel against the Most High in the desert.
Ps. And they challenged God in their heart by asking food according to their desire.
Ps. Yea, they spoke against God. They said, Can God prepare a table in the wilderness?
Ps. Behold, he smote the rock, so that waters gushed out,  streams overflowed. Can he give bread also? Will he provide flesh for his people?
Ps. Therefore Jehovah heard,  was angry. And a fire was kindled against Jacob,  anger also went up against Israel,
Ps. because they did not believe in God,  did not trust in his salvation.
Ps. Yet he commanded the skies above,  opened the doors of heaven,
Ps. and he rained down manna upon them to eat,  gave them food from heaven.
Ps. Man ate the bread of the mighty. He sent them food to the full.
Ps. He caused the east wind to blow in the heavens,  by his power he guided the south wind.
Ps. He also rained flesh upon them as the dust,  winged birds as the sand of the seas.
Ps. And he let it fall in the midst of their camp round about their habitations.
Ps. So they ate,  were well filled,  he gave them their own desire.
Ps. They were not estranged from that which they desired. Their food was yet in their mouths
Ps. when the anger of God went up against them,  killed of the fattest of them,  smote down the young men of Israel.
Ps. For all this they still sinned,  did not believe in his wondrous works.
Ps. Therefore he consumed their days in vanity,  their years in terror.
Ps. When he killed them, then they inquired after him,  they returned and sought God earnestly.
Ps. And they remembered that God was their rock,  the Most High God their redeemer.
Ps. But they flattered him with their mouth,  lied to him with their tongue.
Ps. For their heart was not right with him, nor were they faithful in his covenant.
Ps. But he, being merciful, forgave iniquity,  destroyed not. Yea, many a time he turned his anger away,  did not stir up all his wrath.
Ps. And he remembered that they were but flesh, a wind that passes away,  comes not again.
Ps. How often they rebelled against him in the wilderness,  grieved him in the desert!
Ps. And they turned again and challenged God,  provoked the Holy One of Israel.
Ps. They did not remember his hand, nor the day when he redeemed them from the adversary,
Ps. how he set his signs in Egypt,  his wonders in the field of Zoan,
Ps. and turned their rivers into blood,  their streams, so that they could not drink.
Ps. He sent among them swarms of flies, which devoured them,  frogs, which destroyed them.
Ps. He also gave their increase to the caterpillar,  their labor to the locust.
Ps. He destroyed their vines with hail,  their sycamore trees with frost.
Ps. He also gave over their cattle to the hail,  their flocks to hot thunderbolts.
Ps. He cast upon them the fierceness of his anger, wrath,  indignation,  trouble, a band of agents of evil.
Ps. He made a path for his anger. He spared not their soul from death,  gave their life over to the pestilence,
Ps. and smote all the firstborn in Egypt, the chief of their strength in the tents of Ham.
Ps. But he led forth his own people like sheep,  guided them in the wilderness like a flock.
Ps. And he led them safely, so that they feared not,  the sea overwhelmed their enemies.
Ps. And he brought them to the border of his sanctuary, to this mountain, which his right hand had gotten.
Ps. He also drove out the nations before them,  allotted them for an inheritance by line,  made the tribes of Israel to dwell in their tents.
Ps. Yet they challenged and rebelled against the Most High God,  kept not his testimonies,
Ps. but turned back,  dealt treacherously like their fathers. They were turned aside like a deceitful bow.
Ps. For they provoked him to anger with their high places,  moved him to jealousy with their graven images.
Ps. When God heard, he was angry,  greatly abhorred Israel,
Ps. so that he forsook the tabernacle of Shiloh, the tent which he placed among men,
Ps. and delivered their strength into captivity,  their glory into the adversary's hand.
Ps. He also gave his people over to the sword,  was angry with his inheritance.
Ps. Fire devoured their young men,  their virgins had no marriage-song.
Ps. Their priests fell by the sword,  their widows made no lamentation.
Ps. Then the Lord awoke as out of sleep, like a mighty man who shouts because of wine.
Ps. And he smote his adversaries backward. He put them to a perpetual reproach.
Ps. Moreover he refused the tent of Joseph,  chose not the tribe of Ephraim,
Ps. but chose the tribe of Judah, the mount Zion which he loved.
Ps. And he built his sanctuary like the heights, like the earth which he has established forever.
Ps. He also chose David his servant,  took him from the sheepfolds.
Ps. He brought him from following the ewes that have their young, to be the shepherd of Jacob his people,  Israel his inheritance.
Ps. So he was their shepherd according to the integrity of his heart,  guided them by the skillfulness of his hands.
Ps. O God, the nations have come into thine inheritance. They have defiled thy holy temple. They have laid Jerusalem in heaps.
Ps. They have given the dead bodies of thy servants to be food to the birds of the heavens, the flesh of thy sanctified to the beasts of the earth.
Ps. They have shed their blood like water round about Jerusalem,  there was none to bury them.
Ps. We have become a reproach to our neighbors, a scoffing and derision to those who are round about us.
Ps. How long, O Jehovah? Will thou be angry forever? Shall thy jealousy burn like fire?
Ps. Pour out thy wrath upon the nations that do not know thee,  upon the kingdoms that do not call upon thy name.
Ps. For they have devoured Jacob,  laid waste his habitation.
Ps. Do not remember against us the iniquities of our forefathers. Let thy tender mercies speedily meet us, for we are brought very low.
Ps. Help us, O God of our salvation, for the glory of thy name. And deliver us,  forgive our sins, for thy name's sake.
Ps. Why should the nations say, Where is their God? Let the avenging of the blood of thy servants which is shed be known among the nations in our sight.
Ps. Let the sighing of the prisoner come before thee. According to the greatness of thy power preserve thou those who are appointed to death,
Ps. and render to our neighbors sevenfold into their bosom their reproach with which they have reproached thee, O Lord,
Ps. so we thy people and sheep of thy pasture will give thee thanks forever. We will show forth thy praise to all generations.
Ps. Give ear, O Shepherd of Israel, thou who lead Joseph like a flock. Thou who sit above the cherubim, shine forth.
Ps. Stir up thy might before Ephraim and Benjamin and Manasseh,  come to save us.
Ps. Turn us again, O God,  cause thy face to shine,  we shall be saved.
Ps. O Jehovah God of hosts, how long will thou be angry against the prayer of thy people?
Ps. Thou have fed them with the bread of tears,  given them tears to drink in large measure.
Ps. Thou make us hatred to our neighbors,  our enemies laugh among themselves.
Ps. Turn us again, O God of hosts,  cause thy face to shine,  we shall be saved.
Ps. Thou brought a vine out of Egypt. Thou drove out the nations,  planted it.
Ps. Thou prepared place before it,  it took deep root,  filled the land.
Ps. The mountains were covered with the shadow of it,  the boughs of it were like cedars of God.
Ps. It sent out its branches to the sea,  its shoots to the River.
Ps. Why have thou broken down its walls, so that all those who pass by the way pluck it?
Ps. The boar out of the wood ravages it,  the wild beasts of the field feed on it.
Ps. Turn again, we beseech thee, O God of hosts. Look down from heaven, , behold,  visit this vine,
Ps. and the stock which thy right hand planted,  the branch that thou made strong for thyself.
Ps. It is burned with fire, it is cut down. They perish at the rebuke of thy countenance.
Ps. Let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand, upon the son of man whom thou made strong for thyself,
Ps. so shall we not go back from thee. Revive thou us,  we will call upon thy name.
Ps. Turn us again, O Jehovah God of hosts, cause thy face to shine,  we shall be saved.
Ps. Sing aloud to God our strength. Make a joyful noise to the God of Jacob.
Ps. Raise a song,  bring here the timbrel, the pleasant harp with the psaltery.
Ps. Blow the trumpet at the new moon, at the full moon, on our feast-day.
Ps. For it is a statute for Israel, an ordinance of the God of Jacob.
Ps. He appointed it in Joseph for a testimony when he went out over the land of Egypt, where I heard a language that I knew not.
Ps. I removed his shoulder from the burden. His hands were freed from the basket.
Ps. Thou called in trouble,  I delivered thee. I answered thee in the secret place of thunder. I proved thee at the waters of Meribah. Selah.
Ps. Hear, O my people,  I will testify to thee, O Israel, if thou would hearken to me!
Ps. There shall no strange god be in thee, nor shall thou worship any foreign god.
Ps. I am Jehovah thy God who brought thee up out of the land of Egypt. Open thy mouth wide,  I will fill it.
Ps. But my people hearkened not to my voice,  Israel would none of me.
Ps. So I let them go after the stubbornness of their heart, that they might walk in their own counsels.
Ps. O that my people would hearken to me, that Israel would walk in my ways!
Ps. I would soon subdue their enemies,  turn my hand against their adversaries.
Ps. (The haters of Jehovah feign obedience to him,  their time is forever.)
Ps. He would feed them also with the finest of the wheat. And I would satisfy thee with honey out of the rock.
Ps. God stands in the congregation of God. He judges among the gods.
Ps. How long will ye judge unjustly,  respect the persons of the wicked? Selah.
Ps. Judge the poor man and the orphan. Do justice to the afflicted and destitute man.
Ps. Rescue the poor and needy man. Deliver from the hand of the wicked man.
Ps. They know not, nor do they understand. They walk to and fro in darkness. All the foundations of the earth are shaken.
Ps. I said, Ye are gods,  all of you sons of the Most High.
Ps. Nevertheless ye shall die like men,  fall like one of the rulers.
Ps. Arise, O God, judge the earth, for thou shall inherit all the nations.
Ps. O God, keep thou not silence. Hold not thy peace,  be not still, O God.
Ps. For, lo, thine enemies make a tumult,  those who hate thee have lifted up the head.
Ps. They take crafty counsel against thy people,  consult together against thy hidden ones.
Ps. They have said, Come,  let us cut them off from being a nation, that the name of Israel may be no more in remembrance.
Ps. For they have consulted together with one consent. They make a covenant against thee:
Ps. the tents of Edom,  the Ishmaelites, Moab,  the Hagarenes,
Ps. Gebal,  Ammon,  Amalek, Philistia with the inhabitants of Tyre,
Ps. Assyria also is joined with them; they have helped the sons of Lot. Selah.
Ps. Do thou to them as to Midian, as to Sisera, as to Jabin, at the river Kishon,
Ps. who perished at Endor, who became as dung for the earth.
Ps. Make their ranking men like Oreb and Zeeb, yea, all their rulers like Zebah and Zalmunna,
Ps. who said, Let us take to ourselves in possession the habitations of God.
Ps. O my God, make them like the whirling dust, as stubble before the wind,
Ps. as the fire that burns the forest,  as the flame that sets the mountains on fire.
Ps. So pursue them with thy tempest,  terrify them with thy storm.
Ps. Fill their faces with confusion, that they may seek thy name, O Jehovah.
Ps. Let them be put to shame and dismayed forever. Yea, let them be confounded and perish,
Ps. that they may know that thou alone, whose name is Jehovah, are the Most High over all the earth.
Ps. How amiable are thy tabernacles, O Jehovah of hosts!
Ps. My soul longs, yea, even faints for the courts of Jehovah. My heart and my flesh cry out to the living God.
Ps. Yea, the sparrow has found her a house,  the swallow a nest for herself where she may lay her young, even thine altars, O Jehovah of hosts, my King and my God.
Ps. Blessed are those who dwell in thy house. They will still be praising thee. Selah.
Ps. Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee, in whose heart are the highways to Zion.
Ps. Passing through the valley of weeping they make it a place of springs. Yea, the early rain covers it with blessings.
Ps. They go from strength to strength; each one of them appears before God in Zion.
Ps. O Jehovah God of hosts, hear my prayer. Give ear, O God of Jacob. Selah.
Ps. Behold, O God our shield,  look upon the face of thine anointed.
Ps. For a day in thy courts is better than a thousand. I had rather be a doorkeeper in the house of my God, than to dwell in the tents of wickedness.
Ps. For Jehovah God is a sun and a shield. Jehovah will give grace and glory. He will withhold no good thing from those who walk uprightly.
Ps. O Jehovah of hosts, blessed is the man who trusts in thee.
Ps. Jehovah, thou have been favorable to thy land. Thou have brought back the captivity of Jacob.
Ps. Thou have forgiven the iniquity of thy people. Thou have covered all their sin. Selah.
Ps. Thou have taken away all thy wrath. Thou have turned from the fierceness of thine anger.
Ps. Turn us, O God of our salvation,  cause thine indignation toward us to cease.
Ps. Will thou be angry with us forever? Will thou draw out thine anger to all generations?
Ps. Will thou not revive us again, that thy people may rejoice in thee?
Ps. Show us thy loving kindness, O Jehovah,  grant us thy salvation.
Ps. I will hear what God, Jehovah, will speak, for he will speak peace to his people,  to his sanctified. But let them not turn again to folly.
Ps. Surely his salvation is near those who fear him, that glory may dwell in our land.
Ps. Mercy and truth are met together. Righteousness and peace have kissed each other.
Ps. Truth springs out of the earth,  righteousness has looked down from heaven.
Ps. Yea, Jehovah will give that which is good,  our land shall yield its increase.
Ps. Righteousness shall go before him,  shall make his footsteps a path.
Ps. Bow down thine ear, O Jehovah,  answer me, for I am poor and needy.
Ps. Preserve my soul, for I am devout. O thou my God, save thy servant who trusts in thee.
Ps. Be merciful to me, O Lord, for to thee do I cry all the day long.
Ps. Rejoice the soul of thy servant, for to thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul.
Ps. For thou, Lord, are good,  ready to forgive,  abundant in loving kindness to all those who call upon thee.
Ps. Give ear, O Jehovah, to my prayer,  hearken to the voice of my supplications.
Ps. In the day of my trouble I will call upon thee, for thou will answer me.
Ps. There is none like thee among the gods, O Lord, nor like thy works.
Ps. All nations whom thou have made shall come and worship before thee, O Lord,  they shall glorify thy name.
Ps. For thou are great,  do wondrous things. Thou alone are God.
Ps. Teach me thy way, O Jehovah, I will walk in thy truth. Unite my heart to fear thy name.
Ps. I will praise thee, O Lord my God, with my whole heart,  I will glorify thy name for evermore.
Ps. For great is thy loving kindness toward me,  thou have delivered my soul from the lowest Sheol.
Ps. O God, the proud have risen up against me,  a company of violent men have sought after my soul,  have not set thee before them.
Ps. But thou, O Lord, are a God merciful and gracious, slow to anger,  abundant in loving kindness and truth.
Ps. O turn to me,  have mercy upon me. Give thy strength to thy servant,  save the son of thy handmaid.
Ps. Show me a sign for good, that those who hate me may see it,  be put to shame, because thou, Jehovah, have helped me,  comforted me.
Ps. His foundation is in the holy mountains.
Ps. Jehovah loves the gates of Zion more than all the dwellings of Jacob.
Ps. Glorious things are spoken of thee, O city of God. Selah.
Ps. I will make mention of Rahab and Babylon as among those who know me. Behold, Philistia,  Tyre, with Ethiopia: This man was born there.
Ps. Yea, of Zion it shall be said, this and that man was born in her,  the Most High himself will establish her.
Ps. Jehovah will count when he writes up the peoples: This man was born there. Selah.
Ps. Those who sing as well as those who dance shall say, All my fountains are in thee.
Ps. O Jehovah, the God of my salvation, I have cried day and night before thee.
Ps. Let my prayer enter into thy presence. Incline thine ear to my cry.
Ps. For my soul is full of troubles,  my life draws near to Sheol.
Ps. I am reckoned with those who go down into the pit. I am as a man who has no help,
Ps. cast off among the dead, like the slain who lie in the grave, whom thou remember no more,  they are cut off from thy hand.
Ps. Thou have laid me in the lowest pit, in dark places, in the deeps.
Ps. Thy wrath lays hard upon me,  thou have afflicted me with all thy waves. Selah.
Ps. Thou have put my acquaintances far from me. Thou have made me an abomination to them. I am shut up,  I cannot come forth.
Ps. My eye wastes away because of affliction. I have called daily upon thee, O Jehovah, I have spread forth my hands to thee.
Ps. Will thou show wonders to the dead? Shall those who are deceased arise and praise thee? Selah.
Ps. Shall thy loving kindness be declared in the grave, or thy faithfulness in destruction?
Ps. Shall thy wonders be known in the dark,  thy righteousness in the land of forgetfulness?
Ps. But to thee, O Jehovah, I have cried,  in the morning my prayer shall come before thee.
Ps. Jehovah, why do thou cast off my soul? Why do thou hide thy face from me?
Ps. I am afflicted and ready to die from my youth up. While I suffer thy terrors I am confounded.
Ps. Thy fierce wrath has gone over me. Thy terrors have cut me off.
Ps. They came round about me like water all the day long. They encompassed me around together.
Ps. Thou have put beloved and friend far from me,  my acquaintances into darkness.
Ps. I will sing of the loving kindness of Jehovah forever. With my mouth I will make known thy faithfulness to all generations.
Ps. For I have said, Mercy shall be built up forever. Thy faithfulness thou will establish in the very heavens.
Ps. I have made a covenant with my chosen. I have sworn to David my servant:
Ps. Thy seed I will establish forever,  build up thy throne to all generations. Selah.
Ps. And the heavens shall praise thy wonders, O Jehovah, thy faithfulness also in the assembly of the sanctified.
Ps. For who in the clouds can be compared to Jehovah? Who among the sons of the mighty is like Jehovah,
Ps. a God very awesome in the council of the holy ones,  to be feared above all those who are round about him?
Ps. O Jehovah God of hosts, who is a mighty one like thee, O Jehovah? And thy faithfulness is round about thee.
Ps. Thou rule the pride of the sea. When the waves of it arise, thou still them.
Ps. Thou have broken Rahab in pieces, as a wounded man. Thou have scattered thine enemies with the arm of thy strength.
Ps. The heavens are thine, the earth also is thine, the world and the fullness of it; thou have founded them.
Ps. The north and the south, thou have created them. Tabor and Hermon rejoice in thy name.
Ps. Thou have a mighty arm. Strong is thy hand,  high is thy right hand.
Ps. Righteousness and justice are the foundation of thy throne. Loving kindness and truth go before thy face.
Ps. Blessed is the people who know the joyful sound. They walk, O Jehovah, in the light of thy countenance.
Ps. In thy name do they rejoice all the day,  in thy righteousness are they exalted.
Ps. For thou are the glory of their strength,  in thy favor our horn shall be exalted.
Ps. For our shield belongs to Jehovah,  our king to the Holy One of Israel.
Ps. Then thou spoke in a vision to thy sanctified,  said, I have laid help upon a mighty man. I have exalted a chosen man out of the people.
Ps. I have found David my servant. With my holy oil I have anointed him,
Ps. with whom my hand shall be established. My arm also shall strengthen him.
Ps. The enemy shall not exact from him, nor the son of wickedness afflict him.
Ps. And I will beat down his adversaries before him,  smite those who hate him,
Ps. but my faithfulness and my loving kindness shall be with him,  in my name shall his horn be exalted.
Ps. I will also set his hand on the sea,  his right hand on the rivers.
Ps. He shall cry to me, Thou are my Father, my God,  the rock of my salvation.
Ps. I also will make him firstborn, the highest of the kings of the earth.
Ps. I will keep my loving kindness for him for evermore. And my covenant shall stand fast with him.
Ps. I will also make his seed to endure forever,  his throne as the days of heaven.
Ps. If his sons forsake my law,  walk not in my ordinances,
Ps. if they break my statutes,  keep not my commandments,
Ps. then I will visit their transgression with the rod,  their iniquity with stripes,
Ps. but my loving kindness I will not utterly take from him, nor allow my faithfulness to fail.
Ps. I will not break my covenant, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips.
Ps. I have sworn once by my holiness; I will not lie to David.
Ps. His seed shall endure forever,  his throne as the sun before me.
Ps. It shall be established forever as the moon,  as the faithful witness in the sky. Selah.
Ps. But thou have cast off and rejected. Thou have been angry with thine anointed.
Ps. Thou have abhorred the covenant of thy servant. Thou have profaned his crown to the ground.
Ps. Thou have broken down all his hedges. Thou have brought his strongholds to ruin.
Ps. All who pass by the way rob him. He has become a reproach to his neighbors.
Ps. Thou have exalted the right hand of his adversaries. Thou have made all his enemies to rejoice.
Ps. Yea, thou turn back the edge of his sword,  have not made him to stand in the battle.
Ps. Thou have made his brightness to cease,  cast his throne down to the ground.
Ps. The days of his youth thou have shortened. Thou have covered him with shame. Selah.
Ps. How long, O Jehovah? Will thou hide thyself forever? Shall thy wrath burn like fire?
Ps. O remember how short my time is, for what vanity thou have created all the sons of men!
Ps. What man is he who shall live and not see death, who shall deliver his soul from the power of Sheol? Selah.
Ps. Lord, where are thy former loving kindnesses, which thou swore to David in thy faithfulness?
Ps. Remember, Lord, the reproach of thy servants, how I bear in my bosom all the mighty peoples,
Ps. with which thine enemies have reproached, O Jehovah, with which they have reproached the footsteps of thine anointed.
Ps. Blessed be Jehovah for evermore. Truly,  Truly.
Ps. Lord, thou have been our dwelling-place in all generations.
Ps. Before the mountains were brought forth, or thou had ever formed the earth and the world, even from everlasting to everlasting, thou are God.
Ps. Thou turn man to destruction,  say, Return, ye sons of men.
Ps. For a thousand years in thy sight are but as yesterday when it is past,  as a watch in the night.
Ps. Thou carry them away as with a flood. They are as a sleep. In the morning they are like grass which grows up.
Ps. In the morning it flourishes,  grows up. In the evening it is cut down,  withers.
Ps. For we are consumed in thine anger,  in thy wrath are we troubled.
Ps. Thou have set our iniquities before thee, our secret sins in the light of thy countenance.
Ps. For all our days are passed away in thy wrath. We bring our years to an end as a sigh.
Ps. The days of our years are threescore years and ten, or even by reason of strength fourscore years, yet their pride is but labor and sorrow, for it is soon gone,  we fly away.
Ps. Who knows the power of thine anger,  thy wrath according to the fear that is due to thee?
Ps. So teach us to number our days, that we may get us a heart of wisdom.
Ps. Return, O Jehovah. How long? And relent concerning thy servants.
Ps. O satisfy us in the morning with thy loving kindness, that we may rejoice and be glad all our days.
Ps. Make us glad according to the days in which thou have afflicted us,  the years in which we have seen evil.
Ps. Let thy work appear to thy servants,  thy glory upon their sons.
Ps. And let the favor of the Lord our God be upon us. And establish thou the work of our hands upon us, yea, the work of our hands establish thou it.
Ps. He who dwells in the secret place of the Most High shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty.
Ps. I will say of Jehovah, He is my refuge and my fortress, my God, in whom I trust.
Ps. For he will deliver thee from the snare of the fowler,  from the deadly pestilence.
Ps. He will cover thee with his pinions,  under his wings shall thou take refuge. His truth is a shield and a buckler.
Ps. Thou shall not be afraid for the terror by night, nor for the arrow that flies by day,
Ps. for the pestilence that walks in darkness, nor for the destruction that wastes at noonday.
Ps. A thousand shall fall at thy side,  ten thousand at thy right hand,  it shall not come near thee.
Ps. Thou shall only behold with thine eyes,  see the reward of the wicked.
Ps. For thou, O Jehovah, are my refuge! Thou have made the Most High thy habitation.
Ps. There shall no evil befall thee, nor shall any plague come near thy tent,
Ps. for he will give his agents charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways.
Ps. They shall bear thee up in their hands, lest thou dash thy foot against a stone.
Ps. Thou shall tread upon the lion and adder. The young lion and the serpent thou shall trample under foot.
Ps. Because he has set his love upon me, therefore I will deliver him. I will set him on high because he has known my name.
Ps. He shall call upon me,  I will answer him. I will be with him in trouble. I will deliver him,  honor him.
Ps. I will satisfy him with long life,  show him my salvation.
Ps. It is a good thing to give thanks to Jehovah,  to sing praises to thy name, O Most High,
Ps. to show forth thy loving kindness in the morning,  thy faithfulness every night,
Ps. with an instrument of ten strings,  with the psaltery, with a solemn sound upon the harp.
Ps. For thou, Jehovah, have made me glad through thy work. I will triumph in the works of thy hands.
Ps. How great are thy works, O Jehovah! Thy thoughts are very deep.
Ps. A brutish man knows not, nor does a fool understand this.
Ps. When the wicked spring as the grass,  when all the workers of iniquity flourish, it is that they shall be destroyed forever,
Ps. but thou, O Jehovah, are on high for evermore.
Ps. For, lo, thine enemies, O Jehovah, for, lo, thine enemies shall perish. All the workers of iniquity shall be scattered.
Ps. But thou have exalted my horn like the wild ox's. I am anointed with fresh oil,
Ps. and my eye has seen my enemies. My ears have heard of the evildoers who rise up against me.
Ps. A righteous man shall flourish like the palm tree. He shall grow like a cedar in Lebanon.
Ps. Men who are planted in the house of Jehovah shall flourish in the courts of our God.
Ps. They shall still bring forth fruit in old age. They shall be full of sap and green
Ps. to show that Jehovah is upright. He is my rock,  there is no unrighteousness in him.
Ps. Jehovah reigns! He is clothed with majesty. Jehovah is clothed with strength; he has girded himself with it. The world also is established that it cannot be moved.
Ps. Thy throne is established of old. Thou are from everlasting.
Ps. The floods have lifted up, O Jehovah, the floods have lifted up their voice, the floods lift up their waves.
Ps. Above the voices of many waters, the mighty breakers of the sea, Jehovah on high is mighty.
Ps. Thy testimonies are very sure. Holiness befits thy house, O Jehovah, for evermore.
Ps. O Jehovah, thou God to whom vengeance belongs, thou God to whom vengeance belongs, shine forth.
Ps. Lift up thyself, thou judge of the earth. Render to the proud a recompense.
Ps. Jehovah, how long shall the wicked, how long shall the wicked triumph?
Ps. They prate, they speak arrogantly. All the workers of iniquity boast themselves.
Ps. They break in pieces thy people, O Jehovah,  afflict thy heritage.
Ps. They kill the widow and the sojourner,  murder the fatherless.
Ps. And they say, Jehovah will not see, nor will the God of Jacob consider.
Ps. Consider, ye brutish among the people,  ye fools, when will ye be wise?
Ps. He who planted the ear, shall he not hear? He who formed the eye, shall he not see?
Ps. He who chastises the nations, shall he not correct, even he who teaches man knowledge?
Ps. Jehovah knows the thoughts of man, that they are vanity.
Ps. Blessed is the man whom thou chasten, O Jehovah,  teach out of thy law,
Ps. that thou may give him rest from the days of adversity, until the pit is dug for a wicked man.
Ps. For Jehovah will not cast off his people, nor will he forsake his inheritance.
Ps. For judgment shall return to righteousness,  all the upright in heart shall follow it.
Ps. Who will rise up for me against the evildoers? Who will stand up for me against the workers of iniquity?
Ps. Unless Jehovah had been my help, my soul would have soon dwelt in silence.
Ps. When I said, My foot slips, thy loving kindness, O Jehovah, held me up.
Ps. In the multitude of my thoughts within me thy comforts delight my soul.
Ps. Shall the throne of wickedness have fellowship with thee, which frames mischief by statute?
Ps. They gather themselves together against the soul of a righteous man,  condemn innocent blood.
Ps. But Jehovah has been my high tower,  my God the rock of my refuge.
Ps. And he has brought upon them their own iniquity,  will cut them off in their own wickedness. Jehovah our God will cut them off.
Ps. O come, let us sing to Jehovah. Let us make a joyful noise to the rock of our salvation.
Ps. Let us come before his presence with thanksgiving. Let us make a joyful noise to him with psalms.
Ps. For Jehovah is a great God,  a great King above all gods.
Ps. In his hand are the deep places of the earth. The heights of the mountains are also his.
Ps. The sea is his,  he made it. And his hands formed the dry land.
Ps. O come, let us worship and bow down. Let us kneel before Jehovah our maker.
Ps. For he is our God,  we are the people of his pasture,  the sheep of his hand. Today, O that ye would hear his voice!
Ps. Harden not your heart, as in the provocation, as the day of trial in the wilderness,
Ps. where your fathers challenged me, proved me,  saw my work.
Ps. Forty years long I was grieved with that generation,  said, It is a people that do err in their heart,  they have not known my ways.
Ps. Therefore I swore in my wrath that they should not enter into my rest.
Ps. O sing to Jehovah a new song. Sing to Jehovah, all the earth.
Ps. Sing to Jehovah, bless his name. Show forth his salvation from day to day.
Ps. Declare his glory among the nations, his marvelous works among all the peoples.
Ps. For great is Jehovah,  greatly to be praised. He is to be feared above all gods.
Ps. For all the gods of the peoples are idols,  Jehovah made the heavens.
Ps. Honor and majesty are before him. Strength and beauty are in his sanctuary.
Ps. Ascribe to Jehovah, ye kindred of the peoples. Ascribe to Jehovah glory and strength.
Ps. Ascribe to Jehovah the glory due to his name. Bring an offering,  come into his courts.
Ps. O worship Jehovah in holy array. Tremble before him, all the earth.
Ps. Say among the nations, Jehovah reigns! The world also is established that it cannot be moved. He will judge the peoples with equity.
Ps. Let the heavens be glad,  let the earth rejoice. Let the sea roar,  the fullness thereof.
Ps. Let the field exult,  all that is in it. Then all the trees of the wood shall sing for joy
Ps. before Jehovah, for he comes. For he comes to judge the earth. He will judge the world with righteousness,  the peoples with his truth.
Ps. Jehovah reigns! Let the earth rejoice. Let the multitude of isles be glad.
Ps. Clouds and darkness are round about him. Righteousness and justice are the foundation of his throne.
Ps. A fire goes before him,  burns up his adversaries round about.
Ps. His lightnings lightened the world. The earth saw,  trembled.
Ps. The mountains melted like wax at the presence of Jehovah, at the presence of the Lord of the whole earth.
Ps. The heavens declare his righteousness,  all the peoples have seen his glory.
Ps. Let all those be put to shame who serve graven images, who boast themselves of idols. Bow yourselves to him, all ye gods.
Ps. Zion heard and was glad,  the daughters of Judah rejoiced, because of thy judgments, O Jehovah.
Ps. For thou, Jehovah, are most high above all the earth. Thou are exalted far above all gods.
Ps. O ye who love Jehovah, hate evil. He preserves the souls of his sanctified. He delivers them out of the hand of the wicked.
Ps. Light is sown for the righteous man,  gladness for the upright in heart.
Ps. Be glad in Jehovah, ye righteous,  give thanks to the memory of his holiness.
Ps. O sing to Jehovah a new song, for he has done marvelous things. His right hand,  his holy arm, has wrought salvation for him.
Ps. Jehovah has made known his salvation. He has openly shown his righteousness in the sight of the nations.
Ps. He has remembered his loving kindness and his faithfulness toward the house of Israel. All the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our God.
Ps. Make a joyful noise to Jehovah, all the earth. Break forth and sing for joy, yea, sing praises.
Ps. Sing praises to Jehovah with the harp. With the harp and the voice of melody,
Ps. with trumpets and sound of cornet, make a joyful noise before the King-Jehovah.
Ps. Let the sea roar,  the fullness thereof, the world,  those who dwell in it.
Ps. Let the floods clap their hands. Let the hills sing for joy together
Ps. before Jehovah, for he comes to judge the earth. He will judge the world with righteousness,  the peoples with equity.
Ps. Jehovah reigns! Let the peoples tremble. He sits above the cherubim, let the earth be moved.
Ps. Jehovah is great in Zion,  he is high above all the peoples.
Ps. Let them praise thy great and awesome name. Holy is he.
Ps. The king's strength also loves justice. Thou establish equity. Thou execute justice and righteousness in Jacob.
Ps. Exalt ye Jehovah our God,  worship at his footstool. Holy is he.
Ps. Moses and Aaron among his priests,  Samuel among those who call upon his name, they called upon Jehovah,  he answered them.
Ps. He spoke to them in the pillar of cloud. They kept his testimonies,  the statute that he gave them.
Ps. Thou answered them, O Jehovah our God. Thou were a God who forgave them, though thou took vengeance on their doings.
Ps. Exalt ye Jehovah our God,  worship at his holy hill. For Jehovah our God is holy.
Ps. Make a joyful noise to Jehovah, all ye lands.
Ps. Serve Jehovah with gladness. Come before his presence with singing.
Ps. Know ye that Jehovah, he is God. It is he who has made us,  we are his. We are his people,  the sheep of his pasture.
Ps. Enter into his gates with thanksgiving,  into his courts with praise. Give thanks to him,  bless his name.
Ps. For Jehovah is good. His loving kindness is forever,  his faithfulness to all generations.
Ps. I will sing of loving kindness and justice. To thee, O Jehovah, I will sing praises.
Ps. I will behave myself wisely in a perfect way. O when will thou come to me? I will walk within my house with a perfect heart.
Ps. I will set no base thing before my eyes. I hate the work of those who turn aside. It shall not cleave to me.
Ps. A perverse heart shall depart from me. I will know no evil thing.
Ps. He who slanders his neighbor secretly, him I will destroy. He who has a high look and a proud heart I will not endure.
Ps. My eyes shall be upon the faithful of the land, that they may dwell with me. He who walks in a perfect way, he shall minister to me.
Ps. He who works deceit shall not dwell within my house. He who speaks falsehood shall not be established before my eyes.
Ps. Morning by morning I will destroy all the wicked of the land, to cut off all the workers of iniquity from the city of Jehovah.
Ps. Hear my prayer, O Jehovah,  let my cry come to thee.
Ps. Hide not thy face from me in the day of my distress. Incline thine ear to me. In the day when I call answer me speedily.
Ps. For my days consume away like smoke,  my bones are burned as a firebrand.
Ps. My heart is smitten like grass,  withered, for I forget to eat my bread.
Ps. Because of the voice of my groaning my bones cling to my flesh.
Ps. I am like a pelican of the wilderness. I have become as an owl of the waste places.
Ps. I watch,  have become like a sparrow that is alone upon the house-top.
Ps. My enemies reproach me all the day. Those who are mad against me do curse by me.
Ps. For I have eaten ashes like bread,  mingled my drink with weeping,
Ps. because of thine indignation and thy wrath. For thou have taken me up,  cast me away.
Ps. My days are like a shadow that declines,  I am withered like grass.
Ps. But thou, O Jehovah, will abide forever,  thy memorial to all generations.
Ps. Thou will arise,  have mercy upon Zion, for it is time to have pity upon her, yea, the set time has come.
Ps. For thy servants take pleasure in her stones,  have pity upon her dust.
Ps. So the nations shall fear the name of Jehovah,  all the kings of the earth thy glory.
Ps. For Jehovah has built up Zion. He has appeared in his glory.
Ps. He has regarded the prayer of the destitute,  has not despised their prayer.
Ps. This shall be written for the generation to come. And a people which shall be created shall praise Jehovah.
Ps. For he has looked down from the height of his sanctuary. From heaven Jehovah beheld the earth,
Ps. to hear the sighing of the prisoner, to loose those who are appointed to death,
Ps. that men may declare the name of Jehovah in Zion,  his praise in Jerusalem,
Ps. when the peoples are gathered together,  the kingdoms, to serve Jehovah.
Ps. He weakened my strength in the way. He shortened my days.
Ps. I said, O my God, take me not away in the midst of my days. Thy years are throughout all generations.
Ps. Of old thou laid the foundation of the earth,  the heavens are the work of thy hands.
Ps. They shall perish,  thou shall endure. Yea, all of them shall grow old like a garment. As a vesture thou shall change them,  they shall be changed,
Ps. but thou are the same,  thy years shall have no end.
Ps. The sons of thy servants shall continue,  their seed shall be established before thee.
Ps. Bless Jehovah, O my soul,  all that is within me, bless his holy name.
Ps. Bless Jehovah, O my soul,  forget not all his benefits,
Ps. who forgives all thine iniquities, who heals all thy diseases,
Ps. who redeems thy life from destruction, who crowns thee with loving kindness and tender mercies,
Ps. who satisfies thy desire with good things,  thy youth is renewed like the eagle.
Ps. Jehovah executes righteous acts,  judgments for all who are oppressed.
Ps. He made known his ways to Moses, his doings to the sons of Israel.
Ps. Jehovah is merciful and gracious, slow to anger,  abundant in loving kindness.
Ps. He will not always chide, nor will he keep it forever.
Ps. He has not dealt with us according to our sins, nor rewarded us according to our iniquities.
Ps. For as the heavens are high above the earth, so great is his loving kindness toward those who fear him.
Ps. As far as the east is from the west, so far has he removed our transgressions from us.
Ps. Like as a father pities his sons, So Jehovah pities those who fear him.
Ps. For he knows our frame. He remembers that we are dust.
Ps. As for man, his days are as grass, as a flower of the field, so he flourishes.
Ps. For the wind passes over it,  it is gone,  the place thereof shall know it no more.
Ps. But the loving kindness of Jehovah is from everlasting to everlasting upon those who fear him,  his righteousness to son's sons,
Ps. to such as keep his covenant,  to those who remember his precepts to do them.
Ps. Jehovah has established his throne in the heavens,  his kingdom rules over all.
Ps. Bless Jehovah, ye his agents, who are mighty in strength, who fulfill his word, hearkening to the voice of his word.
Ps. Bless Jehovah, all ye his hosts, ye ministers of his, who do his pleasure.
Ps. Bless Jehovah, all ye his works in all places of his dominion. Bless Jehovah, O my soul.
Ps. Bless Jehovah, O my soul. O Jehovah my God, thou are very great. Thou are clothed with honor and majesty,
Ps. who covers thyself with light as with a garment, who stretches out the heavens like a curtain,
Ps. who lays the beams of his chambers in the waters, who makes the clouds his chariot, who walks upon the wings of the wind,
Ps. who makes his agents spirits, his ministers a flame of fire,
Ps. who laid the foundations of the earth that it should not be moved forever.
Ps. Thou covered it with the deep as with a vesture. The waters stood above the mountains.
Ps. At thy rebuke they fled. At the voice of thy thunder they hastened away.
Ps. The mountains rose, the valleys sank down to the place which thou had founded for them.
Ps. Thou have set a bound that they may not pass over, that they turn not again to cover the earth.
Ps. He sends forth springs into the valleys. They run among the mountains.
Ps. They give drink to every beast of the field. The wild donkeys quench their thirst.
Ps. By them the birds of the heavens have their habitation. They sing among the branches.
Ps. He waters the mountains from his chambers. The earth is filled with the fruit of thy works.
Ps. He causes the grass to grow for the cattle,  herbage for the service of man, that he may bring forth food out of the earth,
Ps. and wine that makes glad the heart of man,  oil to make his face to shine,  bread that strengthens man's heart.
Ps. The trees of Jehovah are full, the cedars of Lebanon, which he has planted,
Ps. where the birds make their nests. As for the stork, the fir trees are her house.
Ps. The high mountains are for the wild goats. The rocks are a refuge for the conies.
Ps. He appointed the moon for seasons. The sun knows his going down.
Ps. Thou make darkness,  it is night, during which all the beasts of the forest creep forth.
Ps. The young lions roar after their prey,  seek their food from God.
Ps. The sun arises; they get away,  lie down in their dens.
Ps. Man goes forth to his work and to his labor until the evening.
Ps. O Jehovah, how manifold are thy works! In wisdom have thou made them all. The earth is full of thy riches.
Ps. Yonder is the sea, great and wide, in which are innumerable creeping things, both small and great beasts.
Ps. There go the ships. There is leviathan, whom thou have formed to play in it.
Ps. These all wait for thee, that thou may give them their food in due season.
Ps. Thou give to them, they gather. Thou open thy hand, they are satisfied with good.
Ps. Thou hide thy face, they are troubled. Thou take away their breath, they die,  return to their dust.
Ps. Thou send forth thy Spirit, they are created,  thou renew the face of the ground.
Ps. Let the glory of Jehovah endure forever. Let Jehovah rejoice in his works,
Ps. who looks on the earth,  it trembles. He touches the mountains,  they smoke.
Ps. I will sing to Jehovah as long as I live. I will sing praise to my God while I have any being.
Ps. Let thy meditation be sweet to him. I will rejoice in Jehovah.
Ps. Let sinners be consumed out of the earth,  let the wicked be no more. Bless Jehovah, O my soul. Praise ye Jehovah.
Ps. O give thanks to Jehovah, call upon his name. Make known among the peoples his doings.
Ps. Sing to him, sing praises to him. Talk ye of all his marvelous works.
Ps. Glory ye in his holy name. Let the heart of those who seek Jehovah rejoice.
Ps. Seek ye Jehovah and his strength. Seek his face evermore.
Ps. Remember his marvelous works that he has done, his wonders,  the judgments of his mouth,
Ps. O ye seed of Abraham his servant, ye sons of Jacob, his chosen.
Ps. He is Jehovah our God. His judgments are in all the earth.
Ps. He has remembered his covenant forever, the word which he commanded to a thousand generations,
Ps. which he made with Abraham,  his oath to Isaac,
Ps. and confirmed the same to Jacob for a statute, to Israel for an everlasting covenant,
Ps. saying, To thee I will give the land of Canaan, the lot of your inheritance,
Ps. when they were but a few men in number, yea, very few,  sojourners in it.
Ps. And they went about from nation to nation, From one kingdom to another people.
Ps. He allowed no man to do them wrong. Yea, he reproved kings for their sakes,
Ps. saying, Touch not my anointed men,  do my prophets no harm.
Ps. And he called for a famine upon the land. He broke the whole staff of bread.
Ps. He sent a man before them. Joseph was sold for a servant.
Ps. They hurt his feet with fetters. He was placed in iron.
Ps. Until the time that his word came to pass, the word of Jehovah tried him.
Ps. The king sent and released him, even the ruler of peoples,  let him go free.
Ps. He made him lord of his house,  ruler of all his substance,
Ps. to bind his rulers at his pleasure,  teach his elders wisdom.
Ps. Israel also came into Egypt,  Jacob sojourned in the land of Ham.
Ps. And he increased his people greatly,  made them stronger than their adversaries.
Ps. He turned their heart to hate his people, to deal craftily with his servants.
Ps. He sent Moses his servant,  Aaron whom he had chosen.
Ps. They set among them his signs and wonders in the land of Ham.
Ps. He sent darkness,  made it dark. And they rebelled against his words.
Ps. He turned their waters into blood,  killed their fish.
Ps. Their land swarmed with frogs in the chambers of their kings.
Ps. He spoke,  there came swarms of flies,  lice in all their borders.
Ps. He gave them hail for rain,  flaming fire in their land.
Ps. He also smote their vines and their fig trees,  broke the trees of their borders.
Ps. He spoke,  the locust came,  the grasshopper,  that without number,
Ps. and ate up every herb in their land,  ate up the fruit of their ground.
Ps. He also smote all the firstborn in their land, the chief of all their strength.
Ps. And he brought them forth with silver and gold,  there was not a feeble soul among his tribes.
Ps. Egypt was glad when they departed, for the fear of them had fallen upon them.
Ps. He spread a cloud for a covering,  fire to give light in the night.
Ps. They asked,  he brought quails,  satisfied them with the bread of heaven.
Ps. He opened the rock,  waters gushed out. They ran in the dry places like a river.
Ps. For he remembered his holy word,  Abraham his servant.
Ps. And he brought forth his people with joy,  his chosen with singing.
Ps. And he gave them the lands of the nations,  they took the labor of the peoples in possession,
Ps. that they might keep his statutes,  observe his laws. Praise ye Jehovah.
Ps. Praise ye Jehovah. O give thanks to Jehovah, for he is good, for his loving kindness is forever.
Ps. Who can utter the mighty acts of Jehovah, or show forth all his praise?
Ps. Blessed are those who keep justice,  he who does righteousness at all times.
Ps. Remember me, O Jehovah, with the favor that thou bear to thy people. O visit me with thy salvation,
Ps. that I may see the prosperity of thy chosen, that I may rejoice in the gladness of thy nation, that I may glory with thine inheritance.
Ps. We have sinned with our fathers. We have committed iniquity. we have done wickedly.
Ps. Our fathers did not understand thy wonders in Egypt. They did not remember the multitude of thy loving kindnesses,  were rebellious at the sea, even at the Red Sea.
Ps. Nevertheless he saved them for his name's sake, that he might make his mighty power to be known.
Ps. He also rebuked the Red Sea,  it was dried up. So he led them through the depths as through a wilderness.
Ps. And he saved them from the hand of him who hated them,  redeemed them from the hand of the enemy.
Ps. And the waters covered their adversaries; there was not one of them left.
Ps. Then they believed his words. They sang his praise.
Ps. They soon forgot his works. They did not wait for his counsel,
Ps. but lusted exceedingly in the wilderness,  challenged God in the desert.
Ps. And he gave them their request,  sent leanness into their soul.
Ps. They also envied Moses in the camp,  Aaron the sanctified of Jehovah.
Ps. The earth opened and swallowed up Dathan,  covered the company of Abiram.
Ps. And a fire was kindled in their company. The flame burned up the wicked men.
Ps. They made a calf in Horeb,  worshiped a molten image.
Ps. Thus they changed their glory for the likeness of an ox that eats grass.
Ps. They forgot God their Savior, who had done great things in Egypt,
Ps. wondrous works in the land of Ham,  fearful things by the Red Sea.
Ps. Therefore he said that he would destroy them, had not Moses his chosen stood before him in the breach, to turn away his wrath, lest he should destroy.
Ps. Yea, they despised the pleasant land. They did not believe his word,
Ps. but murmured in their tents,  did not hearken to the voice of Jehovah.
Ps. Therefore he swore to them, that he would overthrow them in the wilderness,
Ps. and that he would overthrow their seed among the nations,  scatter them in the lands.
Ps. They also joined themselves to Baal-peor,  ate the sacrifices of the dead.
Ps. Thus they provoked him to anger with their doings,  the plague broke in upon them.
Ps. Then Phinehas stood up,  executed judgment,  so the plague was stayed.
Ps. And that was reckoned to him for righteousness to all generations for evermore.
Ps. They also angered him at the waters of Meribah, so that it went ill with Moses because of them,
Ps. because they were rebellious against his spirit,  he spoke ill-advisedly with his lips.
Ps. They did not destroy the peoples, as Jehovah commanded them,
Ps. but mingled themselves with the nations,  learned their works,
Ps. and served their idols, which became a snare to them.
Ps. Yea, they sacrificed their sons and their daughters to demons,
Ps. and shed innocent blood, even the blood of their sons and of their daughters, whom they sacrificed to the idols of Canaan. And the land was polluted with blood.
Ps. Thus they were defiled with their works,  played the harlot in their doings.
Ps. Therefore the wrath of Jehovah was kindled against his people,  he abhorred his inheritance.
Ps. And he gave them into the hand of the nations. And those who hated them ruled over them.
Ps. Their enemies also oppressed them,  they were brought into subjection under their hand.
Ps. Many times he delivered them,  they were rebellious in their counsel,  were brought low in their iniquity.
Ps. Nevertheless he regarded their distress when he heard their cry.
Ps. And he remembered his covenant for them,  relented according to the multitude of his loving kindnesses.
Ps. He also made them to be pitied by all those who carried them captive.
Ps. Save us, O Jehovah our God,  gather us from among the nations, to give thanks to thy holy name,  to triumph in thy praise.
Ps. Blessed be Jehovah, the God of Israel, from everlasting even to everlasting. And let all the people say, Truly. Praise ye Jehovah.
Ps. O give thanks to Jehovah, For he is good, for his loving kindness is forever.
Ps. Let the redeemed of Jehovah say so, whom he has redeemed from the hand of the adversary,
Ps. and gathered out of the lands, from the east and from the west, from the north and from the south.
Ps. They wandered in the wilderness in a desert way. They found no city of habitation.
Ps. Hungry and thirsty, their soul fainted in them.
Ps. Then they cried to Jehovah in their trouble,  he delivered them out of their distresses.
Ps. He also led them by a straight way, that they might go to a city of habitation.
Ps. O that men would praise Jehovah for his loving kindness,  for his wonderful works to the sons of men!
Ps. For he satisfies the longing soul,  he fills the hungry soul with good,
Ps. even those who sat in darkness and in the shadow of death, being bound in affliction and iron,
Ps. because they rebelled against the words of God,  scorned the counsel of the Most High.
Ps. Therefore he brought down their heart with labor. They fell down,  there was none to help.
Ps. Then they cried to Jehovah in their trouble,  he saved them out of their distresses.
Ps. He brought them out of darkness and the shadow of death,  broke their bonds apart.
Ps. O that men would praise Jehovah for his loving kindness,  for his wonderful works to the sons of men!
Ps. For he has broken the gates of brass,  cut the bars of iron apart.
Ps. Fools are afflicted because of their transgression,  because of their iniquities.
Ps. Their soul abhors all manner of food,  they draw near to the gates of death.
Ps. Then they cry to Jehovah in their trouble,  he saves them out of their distresses.
Ps. He sends his word,  heals them,  delivers them from their destructions.
Ps. O that men would praise Jehovah for his loving kindness,  for his wonderful works to the sons of men!
Ps. And let them offer the sacrifices of thanksgiving,  declare his works with singing.
Ps. Those who go down to the sea in ships, who do business in great waters,
Ps. these men see the works of Jehovah,  his wonders in the deep.
Ps. For he commands,  raises the stormy wind, which lifts up the waves of it.
Ps. They mount up to the heavens, they go down again to the depths. Their soul melts away because of trouble.
Ps. They reel to and fro,  stagger like a drunken man,  are at their wits' end.
Ps. Then they cry to Jehovah in their trouble,  he brings them out of their distresses.
Ps. He makes the storm a calm, so that the waves of it are still.
Ps. Then they are glad because they are quiet, so he brings them to their desired haven.
Ps. O that men would praise Jehovah for his loving kindness,  for his wonderful works to the sons of men!
Ps. Let them also exalt him in the assembly of the people,  praise him in the seat of the elders.
Ps. He turns rivers into a wilderness,  water springs into a thirsty ground,
Ps. a fruitful land into a salt desert, for the wickedness of those who dwell therein.
Ps. He turns a wilderness into a pool of water,  a dry land into water springs.
Ps. And there he makes the hungry to dwell, that they may prepare a city of habitation,
Ps. and sow fields,  plant vineyards,  get fruits of increase.
Ps. He also blesses them, so that they are multiplied greatly,  he does not allow their cattle to decrease.
Ps. Again, they are diminished and bowed down through oppression, trouble,  sorrow.
Ps. He pours contempt upon rulers,  causes them to wander in the waste, where there is no way.
Ps. Yet he sets a needy man on high from affliction,  makes him families like a flock.
Ps. The upright shall see it,  be glad. And all iniquity shall stop her mouth.
Ps. He who is wise will give heed to these things,  they will consider the loving kindnesses of Jehovah.
Ps. My heart is fixed, O God, I will sing, yea, I will sing praises, even with my glory.
Ps. Awake, psaltery and harp. I myself will awake right early.
Ps. I will give thanks to thee, O Jehovah, among the peoples,  I will sing praises to thee among the nations.
Ps. For thy loving kindness is great above the heavens,  thy truth is to the skies.
Ps. Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens,  thy glory above all the earth.
Ps. That thy beloved may be delivered, save with thy right hand,  answer us.
Ps. God has spoken in his holiness. I will exult. I will divide Shechem,  mete out the valley of Succoth.
Ps. Gilead is mine. Manasseh is mine. Ephraim also is the defense of my head. Judah is my scepter.
Ps. Moab is my wash pot. Upon Edom I will cast my shoe. Over Philistia I will shout.
Ps. Who will bring me into the fortified city? Who has led me to Edom?
Ps. Have thou not cast us off, O God? And thou go not forth, O God, with our armies.
Ps. Give us help against the adversary, for vain is the help of man.
Ps. Through God we shall do valiantly, for he it is who will tread down our adversaries.
Ps. Hold not thy peace, O God of my praise,
Ps. for they have opened against me the mouth of the wicked and the mouth of deceit. They have spoken to me with a lying tongue.
Ps. They have also encompassed me about with words of hatred,  fought against me without a cause.
Ps. For my love they are my adversaries,  I make prayer.
Ps. And they have rewarded me evil for good,  hatred for my love.
Ps. Set thou a wicked man over him,  let an adversary stand at his right hand.
Ps. When he is judged, let him come forth guilty,  let his prayer be turned into sin.
Ps. Let his days be few,  let another take his office.
Ps. Let his sons be fatherless,  his wife a widow.
Ps. Let his sons be vagabonds,  beg,  let them seek out of their desolate places.
Ps. Let a creditor exact all that he has,  let strangers make spoil of his labor.
Ps. Let there be none to extend kindness to him, nor let there be any to have pity on his fatherless sons.
Ps. Let his posterity be cut off. In the generation following let their name be blotted out.
Ps. Let the iniquity of his fathers be remembered with Jehovah,  let not the sin of his mother be blotted out.
Ps. Let them be before Jehovah continually, that he may cut off the memory of them from the earth,
Ps. because he did not remember to show kindness,  persecuted the poor and needy man,  the broken in heart, to kill.
Ps. Yea, he loved cursing,  it came to him. And he did not delight in blessing,  it was far from him.
Ps. He also clothed himself with cursing as with his garment,  it came into his inward parts like water,  like oil into his bones.
Ps. Let it be to him as the raiment with which he covers himself,  for the belt with which he is girded continually.
Ps. This is the reward of my adversaries from Jehovah,  of those who speak evil against my soul.
Ps. But deal thou with me, O Jehovah the Lord, for thy name's sake. Because thy loving kindness is good, deliver thou me,
Ps. for I am poor and needy,  my heart is wounded within me.
Ps. I am gone like the shadow when it declines. I am tossed up and down as the locust.
Ps. My knees are weak through fasting,  my flesh fails of fatness.
Ps. I also have become a reproach to them. When they see me, they shake their head.
Ps. Help me, O Jehovah my God. O save me according to thy loving kindness,
Ps. that they may know that this is thy hand, that thou, Jehovah, have done it.
Ps. Let them curse,  bless thou. When they arise, they shall be put to shame,  thy servant shall rejoice.
Ps. Let my adversaries be clothed with dishonor,  let them cover themselves with their own shame as with a robe.
Ps. I will give great thanks to Jehovah with my mouth. Yea, I will praise him among the multitude.
Ps. For he will stand at the right hand of the needy, to save him from those who judge his soul.
Ps. Jehovah says to my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand until I make thine enemies thy footstool.
Ps. Jehovah will send forth the rod of thy strength out of Zion. Rule thou in the midst of thine enemies.
Ps. Thy people offer themselves willingly in the day of thy power, in holy array. Out of the womb of the morning thou have the dew of thy youth.
Ps. Jehovah has sworn,  will not repent. Thou are a priest forever after the order of Melchizedek.
Ps. The Lord at thy right hand will strike through kings in the day of his wrath.
Ps. He will judge among the nations. He will fill with dead bodies. He will strike through the head in many countries.
Ps. He will drink of the brook in the way, therefore he will lift up the head.
Ps. Praise ye Jehovah. I will give thanks to Jehovah with my whole heart, in the council of the upright,  in the congregation.
Ps. The works of Jehovah are great, sought out by all those who have pleasure in it.
Ps. His work is honor and majesty,  his righteousness endures forever.
Ps. He has made his wonderful works to be remembered. Jehovah is gracious and merciful.
Ps. He has given food to those who fear him. He will ever be mindful of his covenant.
Ps. He has shown his people the power of his works, in giving them the heritage of the nations.
Ps. The works of his hands are truth and justice. All his precepts are sure.
Ps. They are established forever and ever. They are done in truth and uprightness.
Ps. He has sent redemption to his people. He has commanded his covenant forever. Holy and reverend is his name.
Ps. The fear of Jehovah is the beginning of wisdom,  all who act accordingly have a good understanding. His praise endures forever.
Ps. Praise ye Jehovah. Blessed is the man who fears Jehovah, who delights greatly in his commandments.
Ps. His seed shall be mighty upon earth. The generation of the upright shall be blessed.
Ps. Wealth and riches are in his house,  his righteousness endures forever.
Ps. To the upright there arises light in the darkness. He is gracious,  merciful,  righteous.
Ps. It is well with the man who deals graciously and lends. He shall maintain his cause in judgment,
Ps. for he shall never be moved. A righteous man shall be had in everlasting remembrance.
Ps. He shall not be afraid of evil tidings. His heart is fixed, trusting in Jehovah.
Ps. His heart is established, he shall not be afraid, even until he looks over his adversaries.
Ps. He has scattered, he has given to the poor. His righteousness endures forever. His horn shall be exalted with honor.
Ps. A wicked man shall see it,  be grieved. He shall gnash with his teeth,  melt away. The desire of wicked men shall perish.
Ps. Praise ye Jehovah. Praise, O ye servants of Jehovah. Praise the name of Jehovah.
Ps. Blessed be the name of Jehovah from this time forth and for evermore.
Ps. From the rising of the sun to the going down of the same Jehovah's name is to be praised.
Ps. Jehovah is high above all nations,  his glory above the heavens.
Ps. Who is like Jehovah our God who has his seat on high,
Ps. and yet looks upon the low things in heaven and in the earth.
Ps. He raises up a poor man out of the dust,  lifts up a needy man from the dunghill,
Ps. that he may set him with rulers, even with the rulers of his people.
Ps. He makes the barren woman to keep house, a joyful mother of sons. Praise ye Jehovah.
Ps. When Israel went forth out of Egypt, the house of Jacob from a people of strange language,
Ps. Judah became his sanctuary, Israel his dominion.
Ps. The sea saw it,  fled. The Jordan was driven back.
Ps. The mountains skipped like rams, the little hills like lambs.
Ps. What ails thee, O thou sea, that thou flee? Thou Jordan, that thou turn back?
Ps. Ye mountains, that ye skip like rams, ye little hills, like lambs?
Ps. Tremble, thou earth, at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the God of Jacob,
Ps. who turned the rock into a pool of water, the flint into a fountain of waters.
Ps. Not to us, O Jehovah, not to us,  to thy name give glory. For thy loving kindness,  for thy truth's sake.
Ps. Why should the nations say, Where is now their God?
Ps. But our God is in the heavens. He has done whatever he pleased.
Ps. Their idols are silver and gold, the work of men's hands.
Ps. They have mouths,  they speak not. They have eyes,  they see not.
Ps. They have ears,  they hear not. They have noses,  they smell not.
Ps. They have hands,  they handle not. They have feet,  they walk not, nor do they speak through their throat.
Ps. Those who make them shall be like them. Yea, everyone who trusts in them.
Ps. O Israel, trust thou in Jehovah. He is their help and their shield.
Ps. O house of Aaron, trust ye in Jehovah. He is their help and their shield.
Ps. Ye who fear Jehovah, trust in Jehovah. He is their help and their shield.
Ps. Jehovah has been mindful of us. He will bless, he will bless the house of Israel. He will bless the house of Aaron.
Ps. He will bless those who fear Jehovah, both small and great.
Ps. Jehovah increase you more and more, you and your sons.
Ps. Blessed are ye of Jehovah who made heaven and earth.
Ps. The heavens are the heavens of Jehovah,  the earth he has given to the sons of men.
Ps. The dead do not praise Jehovah, nor any who go down into silence,
Ps. but we will bless Jehovah from this time forth and for evermore. Praise ye Jehovah.
Ps. I love Jehovah because he hears my voice and my supplications.
Ps. Because he has inclined his ear to me, therefore I will call as long as I live.
Ps. The cords of death encompassed me,  the pains of Sheol got hold upon me. I found trouble and sorrow.
Ps. Then I called upon the name of Jehovah. O Jehovah, I beseech thee, deliver my soul.
Ps. Gracious is Jehovah,  righteous. Yea, our God is merciful.
Ps. Jehovah preserves the simple. I was brought low,  he saved me.
Ps. Return to thy rest, O my soul, for Jehovah has dealt bountifully with thee.
Ps. For thou have delivered my soul from death, my eyes from tears, my feet from falling.
Ps. I will walk before Jehovah in the land of the living.
Ps. I believed, therefore I have spoken,  I was greatly afflicted.
Ps. I said in my haste, All men are liars.
Ps. What shall I render to Jehovah for all his benefits toward me?
Ps. I will take the cup of salvation,  call upon the name of Jehovah.
Ps. I will pay my vows to Jehovah, yea, in the presence of all his people.
Ps. Precious in the sight of Jehovah is the death of his sanctified.
Ps. O Jehovah, truly I am thy servant. I am thy servant, the son of thy handmaid. Thou have loosed my bonds.
Ps. I will offer to thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving,  will call upon the name of Jehovah.
Ps. I will pay my vows to Jehovah, yea, in the presence of all his people,
Ps. in the courts of Jehovah's house, in the midst of thee, O Jerusalem. Praise ye Jehovah.
Ps. O praise Jehovah, all ye Gentiles, laud him, all ye peoples.
Ps. For his loving kindness is great toward us,  the truth of Jehovah is forever. Praise ye Jehovah.
Ps. O give thanks to Jehovah, for he is good, for his loving kindness is forever.
Ps. Let Israel now say that his loving kindness is forever.
Ps. Let the house of Aaron now say that his loving kindness is forever.
Ps. Let those now who fear Jehovah say that his loving kindness is forever.
Ps. Out of my distress I called upon Jehovah. Jehovah answered me upon a large place.
Ps. Jehovah is on my side, I will not fear. What can man do to me?
Ps. Jehovah is on my side among those who help me. Therefore I shall look upon those who hate me.
Ps. It is better to take refuge in Jehovah than to put confidence in man.
Ps. It is better to take refuge in Jehovah than to put confidence in rulers.
Ps. All nations encompassed me around. In the name of Jehovah I will cut them off.
Ps. They encompassed me around, yea, they encompassed me around. In the name of Jehovah I will cut them off.
Ps. They encompassed me around like bees. They are quenched as the fire of thorns. In the name of Jehovah I will cut them off.
Ps. Thou thrusted greatly at me that I might fall,  Jehovah helped me.
Ps. Jehovah is my strength and song,  he has become my salvation.
Ps. The voice of rejoicing and salvation is in the tents of the righteous. The right hand of Jehovah does valiantly.
Ps. The right hand of Jehovah is exalted. The right hand of Jehovah does valiantly.
Ps. I shall not die,  live,  declare the works of Jehovah.
Ps. Jehovah has chastened me greatly,  he has not given me over to death.
Ps. Open to me the gates of righteousness. I will enter into them. I will give thanks to Jehovah.
Ps. This is the gate of Jehovah. The righteous shall enter into it.
Ps. I will give thanks to thee, for thou have answered me,  have become my salvation.
Ps. The stone which the builders rejected has become the head of the corner.
Ps. This is Jehovah's doing. It is marvelous in our eyes.
Ps. This is the day which Jehovah has made. We will rejoice and be glad in it.
Ps. Save now, we beseech thee, O Jehovah. O Jehovah, we beseech thee, send now prosperity.
Ps. Blessed be he who comes in the name of Jehovah. We have blessed you out of the house of Jehovah.
Ps. Jehovah is God,  he has given us light. Bind the sacrifice with cords, even to the horns of the altar.
Ps. Thou are my God,  I will give thanks to thee. Thou are my God, I will exalt thee.
Ps. O give thanks to Jehovah, for he is good, for his loving kindness is forever.
Ps. Blessed are those who are perfect in the way, who walk in the law of Jehovah.
Ps. Blessed are those who keep his testimonies, that seek him with the whole heart.
Ps. Yea, they do no unrighteousness. They walk in his ways.
Ps. Thou have commanded thy precepts, that we should observe them diligently.
Ps. O that my ways were established to observe thy statutes!
Ps. Then I shall not be put to shame when I have respect for all thy commandments.
Ps. I will give thanks to thee with uprightness of heart when I learn thy righteous judgments.
Ps. I will observe thy statutes. O forsake me not utterly.
Ps. With what shall a young man cleanse his way? By taking heed according to thy word.
Ps. With my whole heart I have sought thee. O let me not wander from thy commandments.
Ps. I have laid thy word up in my heart that I might not sin against thee.
Ps. Blessed are thou, O Jehovah. Teach me thy statutes.
Ps. With my lips I have declared all the ordinances of thy mouth.
Ps. I have rejoiced in the way of thy testimonies as much as in all riches.
Ps. I will meditate on thy precepts,  have respect for thy ways.
Ps. I will delight myself in thy statutes. I will not forget thy word.
Ps. Deal bountifully with thy servant that I may live, so I will observe thy word.
Ps. Open thou my eyes that I may behold wondrous things out of thy law.
Ps. I am a sojourner in the earth. Hide not thy commandments from me.
Ps. My soul breaks for the longing that it has to thine ordinances at all times.
Ps. Thou have rebuked the proud, who are cursed, who wander from thy commandments.
Ps. Take away from me reproach and contempt, for I have kept thy testimonies.
Ps. Rulers also sat and talked against me,  thy servant meditated on thy statutes.
Ps. Thy testimonies also are my delight and my counselors.
Ps. My soul clings to the dust. Enliven thou me according to thy word.
Ps. I declared my ways,  thou answered me. Teach me thy statutes.
Ps. Make me to understand the way of thy precepts, so I shall meditate on thy wondrous works.
Ps. My soul melts for heaviness. Strengthen thou me according to thy word.
Ps. Remove from me the way of falsehood,  grant me thy law graciously.
Ps. I have chosen the way of faithfulness. I have set thine ordinances.
Ps. I cling to thy testimonies. O Jehovah, put me not to shame.
Ps. I will run the way of thy commandments when thou shall enlarge my heart.
Ps. Teach me, O Jehovah, the way of thy statutes,  I shall keep it to the end.
Ps. Give me understanding,  I shall keep thy law, yea, I shall observe it with my whole heart.
Ps. Make me to go in the path of thy commandments, for therein do I delight.
Ps. Incline my heart to thy testimonies,  not to covetousness.
Ps. Turn away my eyes from beholding vanity,  enliven me in thy ways.
Ps. Confirm to thy servant thy word, which is for the fear of thee.
Ps. Turn away my reproach of which I am afraid, for thine ordinances are good.
Ps. Behold, I have longed after thy precepts. Enliven me in thy righteousness.
Ps. Let thy loving kindnesses also come to me, O Jehovah, even thy salvation, according to thy word.
Ps. So I shall have an answer for him who reproaches me, for I trust in thy word.
Ps. And take not the word of truth utterly out of my mouth, for I have hoped in thine ordinances.
Ps. So shall I observe thy law continually forever and ever.
Ps. And I shall walk at liberty, for I have sought thy precepts.
Ps. I also will speak of thy testimonies before kings,  shall not be put to shame.
Ps. And I will delight myself in thy commandments, which I have loved.
Ps. I will also lift up my hands to thy commandments, which I have loved,  I will meditate on thy statutes.
Ps. Remember the word to thy servant, because thou have made me to hope.
Ps. This is my comfort in my affliction, for thy word has revived me.
Ps. The proud have had me greatly in derision, yet I have not swerved from thy law.
Ps. I have remembered thine ordinances of old, O Jehovah,  have comforted myself.
Ps. Hot indignation has taken hold upon me because of the wicked who forsake thy law.
Ps. Thy statutes have been my songs in the house of my pilgrimage.
Ps. I have remembered thy name, O Jehovah, in the night,  have observed thy law.
Ps. This I have had because I have kept thy precepts.
Ps. Jehovah is my portion; I have said that I would observe thy words.
Ps. I entreated thy favor with my whole heart. Be merciful to me according to thy word.
Ps. I thought on my ways,  turned my feet to thy testimonies.
Ps. I made haste,  delayed not, to observe thy commandments.
Ps. The cords of the wicked have wrapped me around,  I have not forgotten thy law.
Ps. At midnight I will rise to give thanks to thee because of thy righteous ordinances.
Ps. I am a companion of all those who fear thee,  of those who observe thy precepts.
Ps. The earth, O Jehovah, is full of thy loving kindness. Teach me thy statutes.
Ps. Thou have dealt well with thy servant, O Jehovah, according to thy word.
Ps. Teach me good judgment and knowledge, for I have believed in thy commandments.
Ps. Before I was afflicted I went astray,  now I observe thy word.
Ps. Thou are good,  do good. Teach me thy statutes.
Ps. The proud have forged a lie against me. With my whole heart I will keep thy precepts.
Ps. Their heart is as fat as grease,  I delight in thy law.
Ps. It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I may learn thy statutes.
Ps. The law of thy mouth is better to me than thousands of gold and silver.
Ps. Thy hands have made me and fashioned me. Give me understanding that I may learn thy commandments.
Ps. Those who fear thee shall see me and be glad, because I have hoped in thy word.
Ps. I know, O Jehovah, that thy judgments are righteous,  that in faithfulness thou have afflicted me.
Ps. Let, I pray thee, thy loving kindness be for my comfort according to thy word to thy servant.
Ps. Let thy tender mercies come to me that I may live, for thy law is my delight.
Ps. Let the proud be put to shame, for they have overthrown me wrongfully. I will meditate on thy precepts.
Ps. Let those who fear thee turn to me,  they shall know thy testimonies.
Ps. Let my heart be perfect in thy statutes that I be not put to shame.
Ps. My soul faints for thy salvation. I hope in thy word.
Ps. My eyes fail for thy word, while I say, When will thou comfort me?
Ps. For I have become like a wine-skin in the smoke. Yet I do not forget thy statutes.
Ps. How many are the days of thy servant? When will thou execute judgment on those who persecute me?
Ps. The proud have dug pits for me, who are not according to thy law.
Ps. All thy commandments are faithful. They persecute me wrongfully. Help thou me.
Ps. They had almost consumed me upon earth,  I did not forsake thy precepts.
Ps. Revive me according to thy loving kindness, so I shall observe the testimony of thy mouth.
Ps. Forever, O Jehovah, thy word is settled in heaven.
Ps. Thy faithfulness is to all generations. Thou have established the earth,  it abides.
Ps. They abide this day according to thine ordinances, for all things are thy servants.
Ps. Unless thy law had been my delight, I should then have perished in my affliction.
Ps. I will never forget thy precepts, for with them thou have enlivened me.
Ps. I am thine. Save me, for I have sought thy precepts.
Ps. The wicked have waited for me, to destroy me. I will consider thy testimonies.
Ps. I have seen an end of all perfection. Thy commandment is exceedingly broad.
Ps. O how I love thy law! It is my meditation all the day.
Ps. Thy commandments make me wiser than my enemies, for they are ever with me.
Ps. I have more understanding than all my teachers, for thy testimonies are my meditation.
Ps. I understand more than the aged because I have kept thy precepts.
Ps. I have restrained my feet from every evil way, that I might observe thy word.
Ps. I have not turned aside from thine ordinances, for thou have taught me.
Ps. How sweet are thy words to my taste, than honey to my mouth!
Ps. Through thy precepts I get understanding. Therefore I hate every false way.
Ps. Thy word is a lamp to my feet,  light to my path.
Ps. I have sworn,  have confirmed it, that I will observe thy righteous ordinances.
Ps. I am afflicted very much. Revive me, O Jehovah, according to thy word.
Ps. Accept, I beseech thee, the freewill offerings of my mouth, O Jehovah,  teach me thine ordinances.
Ps. My soul is continually in my hand, yet I do not forget thy law.
Ps. The wicked have laid a snare for me, yet I have not gone astray from thy precepts.
Ps. I have taken thy testimonies as a heritage forever, for they are the rejoicing of my heart.
Ps. I have inclined my heart to perform thy statutes forever, even to the end.
Ps. I hate those who are of a double mind,  I love thy law.
Ps. Thou are my hiding place and my shield. I hope in thy word.
Ps. Depart from me, ye evildoers, that I may keep the commandments of my God.
Ps. Uphold me according to thy word, that I may live,  let me not be ashamed of my hope.
Ps. Hold thou me up,  I shall be safe,  shall have respect for thy statutes continually.
Ps. Thou have set at nothing all those who err from thy statutes, for their deceit is falsehood.
Ps. Thou put away all the wicked of the earth like dross. Therefore I love thy testimonies.
Ps. My flesh trembles for fear of thee,  I am afraid of thy judgments.
Ps. I have done justice and righteousness. Leave me not to my oppressors.
Ps. Be surety for thy servant for good. Let not the proud oppress me.
Ps. My eyes fail for thy salvation,  for thy righteous word.
Ps. Deal with thy servant according to thy loving kindness,  teach me thy statutes.
Ps. I am thy servant. Give me understanding, that I may know thy testimonies.
Ps. It is time for Jehovah to work. They have made void thy law.
Ps. Therefore I love thy commandments above gold, yea, above fine gold.
Ps. Therefore I esteem all precepts concerning all things to be right. I hate every false way.
Ps. Thy testimonies are wonderful, therefore my soul keeps them.
Ps. The opening of thy words gives light. It gives understanding to the simple.
Ps. I opened wide my mouth,  panted, for I longed for thy commandments.
Ps. Turn thee to me,  have mercy upon me, as thou used to do to those who love thy name.
Ps. Establish my footsteps in thy word,  let not any iniquity have dominion over me.
Ps. Redeem me from the oppression of man, so I will observe thy precepts.
Ps. Make thy face to shine upon thy servant,  teach me thy statutes.
Ps. Streams of water run down my eyes, because they do not observe thy law.
Ps. Thou are righteous, O Jehovah,  upright are thy judgments.
Ps. Thou have commanded thy testimonies in righteousness and exceeding faithfulness.
Ps. My zeal has consumed me, because my adversaries have forgotten thy words.
Ps. Thy word is very pure, therefore thy servant loves it.
Ps. I am small and despised. I do not forget thy precepts.
Ps. Thy righteousness is an everlasting righteousness,  thy law is truth.
Ps. Trouble and anguish have taken hold on me. Thy commandments are my delight.
Ps. Thy testimonies are righteous forever. Give me understanding,  I shall live.
Ps. I have called with my whole heart. Answer me, O Jehovah. I will keep thy statutes.
Ps. I have called to thee. Save me,  I shall observe thy testimonies.
Ps. I anticipated the dawning of the morning,  cried. I hoped in thy words.
Ps. My eyes anticipated the night-watches that I might meditate on thy word.
Ps. Hear my voice according to thy loving kindness. Enliven me, O Jehovah, according to thine ordinances.
Ps. They draw near who follow after wickedness. They are far from thy law.
Ps. Thou are near, O Jehovah,  all thy commandments are truth.
Ps. Of old I have known from thy testimonies that thou have founded them forever.
Ps. Consider my affliction,  deliver me, for I do not forget thy law.
Ps. Plead thou my cause,  redeem me. Enliven me according to thy word.
Ps. Salvation is far from the wicked, for they seek not thy statutes.
Ps. Great are thy tender mercies, O Jehovah. Enliven me according to thine ordinances.
Ps. Many are my persecutors and my adversaries. I have not swerved from thy testimonies.
Ps. I beheld the treacherous,  was grieved because they do not observe thy word.
Ps. Consider how I love thy precepts. Enliven me, O Jehovah, according to thy loving kindness.
Ps. The sum of thy word is truth,  every one of thy righteous ordinances is forever.
Ps. Rulers have persecuted me without a cause,  my heart stands in awe of thy words.
Ps. I rejoice at thy word, as he who finds great spoil.
Ps. I hate and abhor falsehood. I love thy law.
Ps. Seven times a day I praise thee because of thy righteous ordinances.
Ps. Great peace have those who love thy law,  they have no occasion of stumbling.
Ps. I have hoped for thy salvation, O Jehovah,  have done thy commandments.
Ps. My soul has observed thy testimonies,  I love them exceedingly.
Ps. I have observed thy precepts and thy testimonies, for all my ways are before thee.
Ps. Let my cry come near before thee, O Jehovah. Give me understanding according to thy word.
Ps. Let my supplication come before thee. Deliver me according to thy word.
Ps. Let my lips utter praise, for thou teach me thy statutes.
Ps. Let my tongue sing of thy word, for all thy commandments are righteousness.
Ps. Let thy hand be ready to help me, for I have chosen thy precepts.
Ps. I have longed for thy salvation, O Jehovah,  thy law is my delight.
Ps. Let my soul live,  it shall praise thee. And let thine ordinances help me.
Ps. I have gone astray like a lost sheep. Seek thy servant, for I do not forget thy commandments.
Ps. In my distress I cried to Jehovah,  he answered me.
Ps. Deliver my soul, O Jehovah, from lying lips, from a deceitful tongue.
Ps. What shall be given to thee,  what shall be done more to thee, thou deceitful tongue?
Ps. Sharp arrows of the mighty, with coals of juniper.
Ps. Woe is me, that I sojourn in Meshech, that I dwell among the tents of Kedar!
Ps. My soul has long had her dwelling with him who hates peace.
Ps. I am for peace,  when I speak, they are for war.
Ps. I will lift up my eyes to the mountains. From where shall my help come?
Ps. My help is from Jehovah, who made heaven and earth.
Ps. He will not allow thy foot to be moved. He who keeps thee will not slumber.
Ps. Behold, he who keeps Israel will neither slumber nor sleep.
Ps. Jehovah is thy keeper. Jehovah is thy shade upon thy right hand.
Ps. The sun shall not smite thee by day, nor the moon by night.
Ps. Jehovah will keep thee from all evil. He will keep thy soul.
Ps. Jehovah will keep thy going out and thy coming in from this time forth and for evermore.
Ps. I was glad when they said to me, Let us go to the house of Jehovah.
Ps. Our feet are standing inside thy gates, O Jerusalem.
Ps. Jerusalem, that is built as a city that is compact together,
Ps. where the tribes go up, even the tribes of Jehovah, for an ordinance for Israel, to give thanks to the name of Jehovah.
Ps. For there thrones are set for judgment, the thrones of the house of David.
Ps. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem. They shall prosper who love thee.
Ps. Peace be within thy walls,  prosperity within thy palaces.
Ps. For my brothers and companions' sakes I will now say, Peace be within thee.
Ps. For the sake of the house of Jehovah our God I will seek thy good.
Ps. To thee do I lift up my eyes, O thou who sit in the heavens.
Ps. Behold, as the eyes of servants to the hand of their master, as the eyes of a maid to the hand of her mistress, so our eyes are to Jehovah our God, until he has mercy upon us.
Ps. Have mercy upon us, O Jehovah, have mercy upon us, for we are exceedingly filled with contempt.
Ps. Our soul is exceedingly filled with the scoffing of those who are at ease,  with the contempt of the proud.
Ps. If it had not been Jehovah who was on our side, let Israel now say,
Ps. if it had not been Jehovah who was on our side when men rose up against us,
Ps. then they would have swallowed us up alive when their wrath was kindled against us,
Ps. then the waters would have overwhelmed us, the stream would have gone over our soul,
Ps. then the proud waters would have gone over our soul.
Ps. Blessed be Jehovah, who has not given us as a prey to their teeth.
Ps. Our soul has escaped as a bird out of the snare of the fowlers. The snare is broken,  we have escaped.
Ps. Our help is in the name of Jehovah, who made heaven and earth.
Ps. Those who trust in Jehovah are as mount Zion, which cannot be moved,  abides forever.
Ps. As the mountains are round about Jerusalem, so Jehovah is round about his people from this time forth and for evermore.
Ps. For the scepter of wickedness shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous, that the righteous not put forth their hands to iniquity.
Ps. Do good, O Jehovah, to those who are good,  to those who are upright in their hearts.
Ps. But as for such as turn aside to their crooked ways, Jehovah will lead them forth with the workers of iniquity. Peace be upon Israel.
Ps. When Jehovah brought back those who returned to Zion, we were like those who dream.
Ps. Then our mouth was filled with laughter,  our tongue with singing. Then they said among the nations, Jehovah has done great things for them.
Ps. Jehovah has done great things for us. We are glad.
Ps. Turn again our captivity, O Jehovah, as the streams in the South.
Ps. Those who sow in tears shall reap in joy.
Ps. He who goes forth and weeps, bearing seed for sowing, shall doubtless come again with joy, bringing his sheaves.
Ps. Unless Jehovah builds the house, they labor in vain who build it. Unless Jehovah guards the city, the watchman wake but in vain.
Ps. It is vain for you to rise up early, to take rest late, to eat the bread of toil, for so he gives sleep to his beloved.
Ps. Lo, sons are a heritage of Jehovah,  the fruit of the womb is a reward.
Ps. As arrows in the hand of a mighty man, so are the sons of youth.
Ps. Happy is the man who has his quiver full of them. They shall not be put to shame when they speak with their enemies in the gate.
Ps. Blessed are all who fear Jehovah, who walk in his ways.
Ps. For thou shall eat the labor of thy hands. Happy thou shall be,  it shall be well with thee.
Ps. Thy wife shall be as a fruitful vine in the innermost parts of thy house, thy sons like olive plants round about thy table.
Ps. Behold, thus shall the man be blessed who fears Jehovah.
Ps. Jehovah bless thee out of Zion,  see thou the good of Jerusalem all the days of thy life.
Ps. Yea, see thou thy son's sons. Peace be upon Israel.
Ps. Many a time they have afflicted me from my youth up. Let Israel now say,
Ps. Many a time they have afflicted me from my youth up, yet they have not prevailed against me.
Ps. The plowers plowed upon my back. They made long their furrows.
Ps. Jehovah is righteous. He has cut apart the cords of the wicked.
Ps. Let them be put to shame and turned backward, all those who hate Zion.
Ps. Let them be as the grass upon the housetops, which withers before it grows up,
Ps. with which the reaper fills not his hand, nor he who binds sheaves, his bosom.
Ps. Neither do those who go by say, The blessing of Jehovah be upon you. We bless you in the name of Jehovah.
Ps. Out of the depths I have cried to thee, O Jehovah.
Ps. Lord, hear my voice. Let thine ears be attentive to the voice of my supplications.
Ps. If thou, Jehovah, should note iniquities, O Lord, who could stand?
Ps. But there is forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared.
Ps. I wait for Jehovah. My soul waits,  in his word do I hope,
Ps. my soul for the Lord more than watchmen for the morning, watchmen for the morning.
Ps. O Israel, hope in Jehovah, for with Jehovah there is loving kindness,  with him is plentiful redemption.
Ps. And he will redeem Israel from all his iniquities.
Ps. Jehovah, my heart is not haughty, nor my eyes lofty. Neither do I exercise myself in grand matters, or in things too wonderful for me.
Ps. Surely I have stilled and quieted my soul like a weaned child with his mother. Like a weaned child is my soul within me.
Ps. O Israel, hope in Jehovah from this time forth and for evermore.
Ps. Jehovah, remember for David all his affliction,
Ps. how he swore to Jehovah,  vowed to the Mighty One of Jacob:
Ps. Surely I will not come into the tabernacle of my house, nor go up into my bed,
Ps. I will not give sleep to my eyes, or slumber to my eyelids,
Ps. until I find out a place for Jehovah, a tabernacle for the Mighty One of Jacob.
Ps. Lo, we heard of it in Ephrathah. We found it in the field of the wood.
Ps. We will go into his tabernacles. We will worship at his footstool.
Ps. Arise, O Jehovah, into thy resting-place, thou,  the ark of thy strength.
Ps. Let thy priest be clothed with righteousness,  let thy sanctified shout for joy.
Ps. For thy servant David's sake turn not away the face of thine anointed.
Ps. Jehovah has sworn to David in truth. He will not turn from it: From the fruit of thy body I will set upon thy throne.
Ps. If thy sons will keep my covenant and my testimony that I shall teach them, their sons also shall sit upon thy throne for evermore.
Ps. For Jehovah has chosen Zion. He has desired it for his habitation.
Ps. This is my resting place forever. Here I will dwell, for I have desired it.
Ps. I will abundantly bless her provision. I will satisfy her poor with bread.
Ps. I will also clothe her priests with salvation,  her sanctified shall shout aloud for joy.
Ps. There I will make the horn of David to bud. I have ordained a lamp for my anointed.
Ps. I will clothe his enemies with shame,  upon himself his crown shall flourish.
Ps. Behold, how good and how pleasant it is for brothers to dwell together in unity!
Ps. It is like the precious oil upon the head, that ran down upon the beard, even Aaron's beard, that came down upon the skirt of his garments,
Ps. like the dew of Hermon, that comes down upon the mountains of Zion. For there Jehovah commanded the blessing, even life for evermore.
Ps. Behold, bless ye Jehovah, all ye servants of Jehovah, who stand by night in the house of Jehovah.
Ps. Lift up your hands to the sanctuary,  bless ye Jehovah.
Ps. Jehovah bless thee out of Zion, even he who made heaven and earth.
Ps. Praise ye Jehovah. Praise ye the name of Jehovah. Praise, O ye servants of Jehovah,
Ps. ye who stand in the house of Jehovah, in the courts of the house of our God.
Ps. Praise ye Jehovah, for Jehovah is good. Sing praises to his name, for it is pleasant.
Ps. For Jehovah has chosen Jacob to himself, Israel for his own possession.
Ps. For I know that Jehovah is great,  that our Lord is above all gods.
Ps. Whatever Jehovah pleased, that he has done, in heaven and in earth, in the seas and in all deeps,
Ps. who causes the vapors to ascend from the ends of the earth, who makes lightnings for the rain, who brings forth the wind out of his treasuries,
Ps. who smote the firstborn of Egypt, both of man and beast,
Ps. who sent signs and wonders into the midst of thee, O Egypt, upon Pharaoh,  upon all his servants,
Ps. who smote many nations,  killed mighty kings-
Ps. Sihon king of the Amorites,  Og king of Bashan,  all the kingdoms of Canaan-
Ps. and gave their land for a heritage, a heritage to Israel his people.
Ps. Thy name, O Jehovah, is forever, thy memorial, O Jehovah, throughout all generations.
Ps. For Jehovah will judge his people,  will relent concerning his servants.
Ps. The idols of the nations are silver and gold, the work of men's hands.
Ps. They have mouths,  they speak not. They have eyes,  they see not.
Ps. They have ears,  they hear not, nor is there any breath in their mouths.
Ps. Those who make them shall be like them, yea, everyone who trusts in them.
Ps. O house of Israel, bless ye Jehovah. O house of Aaron, bless ye Jehovah.
Ps. O house of Levi, bless ye Jehovah. Ye who fear Jehovah, bless ye Jehovah.
Ps. Blessed be Jehovah out of Zion, who dwells at Jerusalem. Praise ye Jehovah.
Ps. O give thanks to Jehovah, for he is good, for his loving kindness is forever.
Ps. O give thanks to the God of gods, for his loving kindness is forever.
Ps. O give thanks to the Lord of lords, for his loving kindness is forever,
Ps. to him who alone does great wonders, for his loving kindness is forever,
Ps. to him who by understanding made the heavens, for his loving kindness is forever,
Ps. to him who spread forth the earth above the waters, for his loving kindness is forever,
Ps. to him who made great lights, for his loving kindness is forever,
Ps. the sun to rule by day, for his loving kindness is forever,
Ps. the moon and stars to rule by night, for his loving kindness is forever,
Ps. to him who smote Egypt in their firstborn, for his loving kindness is forever,
Ps. and brought out Israel from among them, for his loving kindness is forever,
Ps. with a strong hand,  with an outstretched arm, for his loving kindness is forever,
Ps. to him who divided the Red Sea apart, for his loving kindness is forever,
Ps. and made Israel to pass through the midst of it, for his loving kindness is forever,
Ps. but overthrew Pharaoh and his army in the Red Sea, for his loving kindness is forever,
Ps. to him who led his people through the wilderness, for his loving kindness is forever,
Ps. to him who smote great kings, for his loving kindness is forever,
Ps. and killed famous kings, for his loving kindness is forever,
Ps. Sihon king of the Amorites, for his loving kindness is forever,
Ps. and Og king of Bashan, for his loving kindness is forever,
Ps. and gave their land for a heritage, for his loving kindness is forever,
Ps. even a heritage to Israel his servant, for his loving kindness is forever,
Ps. who remembered us in our low estate, for his loving kindness is forever,
Ps. and has delivered us from our adversaries, for his loving kindness is forever,
Ps. who gives food to all flesh, for his loving kindness is forever.
Ps. O give thanks to the God of heaven, for his loving kindness is forever.
Ps. By the rivers of Babylon, there we sat down, yea, we wept when we remembered Zion.
Ps. Upon the willows in the midst of it we hung up our harps.
Ps. For there those who led us captive required of us songs,  those who wasted us, mirth, saying, Sing for us one of the songs of Zion.
Ps. How shall we sing Jehovah's song in a foreign land?
Ps. If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget.
Ps. Let my tongue cling to the roof of my mouth, if I do not remember thee, if I do not prefer Jerusalem above my chief joy.
Ps. Remember, O Jehovah, the day of Jerusalem against the sons of Edom, who said, Raze it, raze it, even to the foundation thereof.
Ps. O daughter of Babylon, who is to be destroyed, happy shall he be who rewards thee as thou have served us.
Ps. Happy shall he be who takes and dashes thy little ones against the rock.
Ps. I will give thee thanks with my whole heart. I will sing praises to thee before the gods.
Ps. I will worship toward thy holy temple,  give thanks to thy name for thy loving kindness and for thy truth. For thou have magnified thy word above all thy name.
Ps. Thou answered me in the day that I called. Thou encouraged me with strength in my soul.
Ps. All the kings of the earth shall give thee thanks, O Jehovah, for they have heard the words of thy mouth.
Ps. Yea, they shall sing of the ways of Jehovah, for great is the glory of Jehovah.
Ps. For though Jehovah is high, yet he has respect to the lowly. But he knows the haughty from afar.
Ps. Though I walk in the midst of trouble, thou will revive me. Thou will stretch forth thy hand against the wrath of my enemies,  thy right hand will save me.
Ps. Jehovah will perfect that which concerns me. Thy loving kindness, O Jehovah, is forever. Forsake not the works of thine own hands.
Ps. O Jehovah, thou have searched me,  known.
Ps. Thou know my sitting down and my rising up. Thou understand my thought afar off.
Ps. Thou search out my path and my lying down,  are acquainted with all my ways.
Ps. For there is not a word in my tongue, , lo, O Jehovah, thou know it altogether.
Ps. Thou have beset me behind and before,  laid thy hand upon me.
Ps. Such knowledge is too wonderful for me. It is high, I cannot attain to it.
Ps. Where shall I go from thy Spirit? Or where shall I flee from thy presence?
Ps. If I ascend up into heaven, thou are there. If I make my bed in Sheol, behold, thou are there.
Ps. If I take the wings of the morning,  dwell in the outermost parts of the sea,
Ps. even there thy hand shall lead me,  thy right hand shall hold me.
Ps. If I say, Surely the darkness shall overwhelm me,  the light around me shall be night,
Ps. even the darkness hides not from thee,  the night shines as the day. The darkness and the light are both alike to thee.
Ps. For thou formed my inward parts. Thou covered me in my mother's womb.
Ps. I will give thanks to thee, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made. Wonderful are thy works,  that my soul knows right well.
Ps. My frame was not hidden from thee, when I was made in secret, curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the earth.
Ps. Thine eyes saw my unformed substance,  in thy book they were all written, even the days that were ordained, when as yet there was none of them.
Ps. How precious also are thy thoughts to me, O God! How great is the sum of them!
Ps. I count them; they are more in number than the sand. When I awake, I am still with thee.
Ps. Surely thou will kill the wicked, O God. Depart from me therefore, ye bloodthirsty men.
Ps. For they speak against thee wickedly,  thine enemies take it in vain.
Ps. Do I not hate them, O Jehovah, who hate thee? And am I not grieved with those who rise up against thee?
Ps. I hate them with perfect hatred. They have become my enemies.
Ps. Search me, O God,  know my heart. Try me,  know my thoughts,
Ps. and see if there is any wicked way in me. And lead me in the way everlasting.
Ps. Deliver me, O Jehovah, from the evil man. Preserve me from the violent man,
Ps. and men who devise mischievous things in their heart. They gather themselves continually together for war.
Ps. They have sharpened their tongue like a serpent. Adders' poison is under their lips. Selah.
Ps. Keep me, O Jehovah, from the hands of a wicked man. Preserve me from violent men, who have purposed to thrust aside my steps.
Ps. The proud have hid a snare for me,  cords. They have spread a net by the wayside. They have set snares for me. Selah.
Ps. I said to Jehovah, Thou are my God. Give ear to the voice of my supplications, O Jehovah.
Ps. O Jehovah the Lord, the strength of my salvation, thou have covered my head in the day of battle.
Ps. Grant not, O Jehovah, the desires of the wicked man. Do not further his evil device. They exalt themselves. Selah.
Ps. As for the head of those who encompass me around, let the mischief of their own lips cover them.
Ps. Let burning coals fall upon them. Let them be cast into the fire, into deep pits, from where they shall not rise.
Ps. An evil speaker shall not be established in the earth. Evil shall hunt the violent man to overthrow him.
Ps. I know that Jehovah will maintain the cause of the afflicted man,  justice for the needy.
Ps. Surely the righteous shall give thanks to thy name. The upright shall dwell in thy presence.
Ps. Jehovah, I have called upon thee. Make haste to me. Give ear to my voice when I call to thee.
Ps. Let my prayer be set forth as incense before thee, the lifting up of my hands as the evening sacrifice.
Ps. Set a watch, O Jehovah, before my mouth. Keep the door of my lips.
Ps. Incline not my heart to any evil thing, to practice deeds of wickedness with men who work iniquity. And let me not eat of their dainties.
Ps. Let a righteous man smite me, as a kindness. And let him reprove me, as oil upon the head. Let not my head refuse it. For even in their wickedness my prayer shall continue.
Ps. Their judges are thrown down by the sides of the rock. And they shall hear my words, for they are sweet.
Ps. Like plowing and furrowing the earth, our bones are scattered at the mouth of Sheol.
Ps. For my eyes are to thee, O Jehovah the Lord. In thee do I take refuge. Leave not my soul destitute.
Ps. Keep me from the snare which they have laid for me,  from the traps of the workers of iniquity.
Ps. Let the wicked fall into their own nets, while I pass over.
Ps. I cry with my voice to Jehovah. With my voice to Jehovah I make supplication.
Ps. I pour out my complaint before him. I show my trouble before him.
Ps. When my spirit was overwhelmed within me, thou knew my path. In the way in which I walk they have hidden a snare for me.
Ps. Look on my right hand,  see, for there is no man who knows me. Refuge has failed me. No man cares for my soul.
Ps. I cried to thee, O Jehovah. I said, Thou are my refuge, my portion in the land of the living.
Ps. Attend to my cry, for I am brought very low. Deliver me from my persecutors, for they are stronger than I.
Ps. Bring my soul out of prison that I may give thanks to thy name. The righteous shall encompass me around, for thou will deal bountifully with me.
Ps. Hear my prayer, O Jehovah. Give ear to my supplications. In thy faithfulness answer me,  in thy righteousness.
Ps. And enter not into judgment with thy servant. For in thy sight no man living is righteous.
Ps. For the enemy has persecuted my soul. He has smitten my life down to the ground. He has made me to dwell in dark places as those who have been long dead.
Ps. Therefore my spirit is overwhelmed within me. My heart within me is desolate.
Ps. I remember the days of old. I meditate on all thy doings. I muse on the work of thy hands.
Ps. I spread forth my hands to thee. My soul is as a weary land for thee. Selah.
Ps. Make haste to answer me, O Jehovah, my spirit fails. Hide not thy face from me, lest I become like those who go down into the pit.
Ps. Cause me to hear thy loving kindness in the morning, for in thee do I trust. Cause me to know the way in which I should walk, for I lift up my soul to thee.
Ps. Deliver me, O Jehovah, from my enemies. I flee to thee to hide me.
Ps. Teach me to do thy will, for thou are my God. Thy Spirit is good, lead me in the land of uprightness.
Ps. Revive me, O Jehovah, for thy name's sake. In thy righteousness bring my soul out of trouble.
Ps. And in thy loving kindness cut off my enemies,  destroy all those who afflict my soul, for I am thy servant.
Ps. Blessed be Jehovah, my rock, who teaches my hands to war,  my fingers to fight,
Ps. my loving kindness,  my fortress, my high tower,  my deliverer, my shield,  he in whom I take refuge, who subdues my people under me.
Ps. Jehovah, what is man, that thou take knowledge of him? Or the son of man, that thou make account of him?
Ps. Man is like vanity. His days are as a shadow that passes away.
Ps. Bow thy heavens, O Jehovah,  come down. Touch the mountains,  they shall smoke.
Ps. Cast forth lightning,  scatter them. Send out thine arrows,  discomfit them.
Ps. Stretch forth thy hand from above. Rescue me,  deliver me out of great waters, out of the hand of aliens,
Ps. whose mouth speaks deceit,  whose right hand is a right hand of falsehood.
Ps. I will sing a new song to thee, O God. Upon a psaltery of ten strings I will sing praises to thee.
Ps. Thou are he who gives salvation to kings, who rescues David his servant from the hurtful sword.
Ps. Rescue me,  deliver me out of the hand of aliens, whose mouth speaks deceit,  whose right hand is a right hand of falsehood.
Ps. That our sons shall be as plants grown up in their youth,  our daughters as cornerstones hewn according to the fashion of a palace,
Ps. our garners are full, affording all manner of store, our sheep bring forth thousands and ten thousands in our fields,
Ps. our oxen are well laden, no breaking in,  no going forth,  no outcry in our streets,
Ps. blessed are the people who are in such a case. Blessed are the people whose God is Jehovah.
Ps. I will extol thee, my God, O King,  I will bless thy name forever and ever.
Ps. Every day I will bless thee,  I will praise thy name forever and ever.
Ps. Great is Jehovah,  greatly to be praised,  his greatness is unsearchable.
Ps. One generation shall laud thy works to another,  shall declare thy mighty acts.
Ps. I will meditate on the glorious majesty of thine honor,  of thy wondrous works.
Ps. And men shall speak of the might of thy fearful acts,  I will declare thy greatness.
Ps. They shall utter the memory of thy great goodness,  shall sing of thy righteousness.
Ps. Jehovah is gracious,  merciful, slow to anger,  of great loving kindness.
Ps. Jehovah is good to all,  his tender mercies are over all his works.
Ps. All thy works shall give thanks to thee, O Jehovah,  thy sanctified shall bless thee.
Ps. They shall speak of the glory of thy kingdom,  talk of thy power,
Ps. to make known to the sons of men his mighty acts,  the glory of the majesty of his kingdom.
Ps. Thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom,  thy dominion is throughout all generations.
Ps. Jehovah upholds all who fall,  raises up all those who are bowed down.
Ps. The eyes of all wait for thee,  thou give them their food in due season.
Ps. Thou open thy hand,  satisfy the desire of every living thing.
Ps. Jehovah is righteous in all his ways,  gracious in all his works.
Ps. Jehovah is near to all those who call upon him, to all who call upon him in truth.
Ps. He will fulfill the desire of those who fear him. He also will hear their cry and will save them.
Ps. Jehovah preserves all those who love him,  he will destroy all the wicked.
Ps. My mouth shall speak the praise of Jehovah. And let all flesh bless his holy name forever and ever.
Ps. Praise ye Jehovah. Praise Jehovah, O my soul.
Ps. While I live I will praise Jehovah. I will sing praises to my God while I have any being.
Ps. Put not your trust in rulers, nor in the son of man, in whom there is no help.
Ps. His breath goes forth, he returns to his earth. In that very day his thoughts perish.
Ps. Happy is he who has the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in Jehovah his God,
Ps. who made heaven and earth, the sea,  all that is in them, who keeps truth forever,
Ps. who executes justice for the oppressed, who gives food to the hungry. Jehovah releases the prisoners.
Ps. Jehovah opens the eyes of the blind. Jehovah raises up those who are bowed down. Jehovah loves the righteous.
Ps. Jehovah preserves the sojourners. He upholds the fatherless and widow. But the way of the wicked he turns upside down.
Ps. Jehovah will reign forever, thy God, O Zion, to all generations. Praise ye Jehovah.
Ps. Praise ye Jehovah, for it is good to sing praises to our God. For it is pleasant,  praise is comely.
Ps. Jehovah builds up Jerusalem. He gathers together the outcasts of Israel.
Ps. He heals the broken in heart,  binds up their wounds.
Ps. He counts the number of the stars. He calls them all by names.
Ps. Great is our Lord,  mighty in power. His understanding is infinite.
Ps. Jehovah upholds the meek. He brings the wicked down to the ground.
Ps. Sing to Jehovah with thanksgiving. Sing praises upon the harp to our God,
Ps. who covers the heavens with clouds, who prepares rain for the earth, who makes grass to grow upon the mountains.
Ps. He gives to the beast his food,  to the young ravens which cry.
Ps. He does not delight in the strength of the horse. He takes no pleasure in the legs of a man.
Ps. Jehovah takes pleasure in those who fear him, in those who hope in his loving kindness.
Ps. Praise Jehovah, O Jerusalem. Praise thy God, O Zion.
Ps. For he has strengthened the bars of thy gates. He has blessed thy sons within thee.
Ps. He makes peace in thy borders. He fills thee with the finest of the wheat.
Ps. He sends out his commandment upon earth. His word runs very swiftly.
Ps. He gives snow like wool. He scatters the hoar-frost like ashes.
Ps. He casts forth his ice like morsels. Who can stand before his cold?
Ps. He sends out his word,  melts them. He causes his wind to blow,  the waters flow.
Ps. He shows his word to Jacob, his statutes and his ordinances to Israel.
Ps. He has not dealt so with any nation. And as for his ordinances, they have not known them. Praise ye Jehovah.
Ps. Praise ye Jehovah. Praise ye Jehovah from the heavens. Praise him in the heights.
Ps. Praise ye him, all his agents. Praise ye him, all his host.
Ps. Praise ye him, sun and moon. Praise him, all ye stars of light.
Ps. Praise him, ye heavens of heavens,  ye waters that are above the heavens.
Ps. Let them praise the name of Jehovah. For he commanded,  they were created.
Ps. He has also established them forever and ever. He has made a decree which shall not pass away.
Ps. Praise Jehovah from the earth, ye sea-monsters,  all deeps,
Ps. fire and hail, snow and vapor, stormy wind, fulfilling his word,
Ps. mountains and all hills, fruitful trees and all cedars,
Ps. beasts and all cattle, creeping things and flying birds,
Ps. kings of the earth and all peoples, rulers and all judges of the earth,
Ps. both young men and virgins, old men and sons.
Ps. Let them praise the name of Jehovah, for his name alone is exalted. His glory is above the earth and the heavens.
Ps. And he has lifted up the horn of his people, the praise of all his sanctified, even of the sons of Israel, a people near to him. Praise ye Jehovah.
Ps. Praise ye Jehovah. Sing to Jehovah a new song,  his praise in the assembly of the sanctified.
Ps. Let Israel rejoice in him who made him. Let the sons of Zion be joyful in their King.
Ps. Let them praise his name in the dance. Let them sing praises to him with timbrel and harp.
Ps. For Jehovah takes pleasure in his people. He will beautify the meek with salvation.
Ps. Let the sanctified exult in glory. Let them sing for joy upon their beds.
Ps. The high praises of God are in their mouth,  a two-edged sword in their hand
Ps. to execute vengeance upon the nations,  punishments upon the peoples,
Ps. to bind their kings with chains,  their ranking men with fetters of iron,
Ps. to execute upon them the judgment written. All his sanctified have this honor. Praise ye Jehovah.
Ps. Praise ye Jehovah. Praise God in his sanctuary. Praise him in the firmament of his power.
Ps. Praise him for his mighty acts. Praise him according to his excellent greatness.
Ps. Praise him with trumpet sound. Praise him with psaltery and harp.
Ps. Praise him with timbrel and dance. Praise him with stringed instruments and pipe.
Ps. Praise him with loud cymbals. Praise him with high sounding cymbals.
Ps. Let everything that has breath praise Jehovah. Praise ye Jehovah.
Proverbs
Prov. The proverbs of Solomon the son of David, king of Israel,
Prov. to know wisdom and instruction, to discern the words of understanding,
Prov. to receive instruction in wise dealing, in righteousness and justice and equity,
Prov. to give prudence to the simple, to the young man knowledge and discretion,
Prov. that the wise man may hear,  increase in learning,  that the man of understanding may attain to sound counsels,
Prov. to understand a proverb,  a figure, the words of the wise,  their dark sayings.
Prov. The fear of Jehovah is the beginning of knowledge. The foolish despise wisdom and instruction.
Prov. My son, hear the instruction of thy father,  forsake not the law of thy mother.
Prov. For they shall be a garland of grace to thy head,  chains about thy neck.
Prov. My son, if sinners entice thee, consent thou not.
Prov. If they say, Come with us. Let us lay wait for blood. Let us lurk secretly for the innocent without cause.
Prov. Let us swallow them up alive as Sheol,  whole, as those who go down into the pit.
Prov. We shall find all precious substance. We shall fill our houses with spoil.
Prov. Thou shall cast thy lot among us. We will all have one bag.
Prov. My son, walk not thou in the way with them. Restrain thy foot from their path.
Prov. For their feet run to evil,  they make haste to shed blood.
Prov. For in vain is the net spread in the sight of any bird,
Prov. and these lay wait for their own blood. They lurk secretly for their own lives.
Prov. So are the ways of everyone who is greedy of gain. It takes away the life of the owners of it.
Prov. Wisdom cries aloud in the street. She utters her voice in the broad places.
Prov. She cries in the chief place of concourse, at the entrance of the gates, in the city. She utters her words:
Prov. How long, ye simple ones, will ye love simplicity? And scoffers delight them in scoffing,  fools hate knowledge?
Prov. Turn back at my reproof. Behold, I will pour out my spirit upon you. I will make my words known to you.
Prov. Because I have called,  ye have refused, I have stretched out my hand,  no man has regarded,
Prov. but ye have made all my counsel void,  want none of my reproof,
Prov. I also will laugh at your calamity. I will mock when your fear comes,
Prov. when your fear comes as a storm,  your calamity comes on as a whirlwind, when distress and anguish come upon you.
Prov. Then they will call upon me,  I will not answer. They will seek me diligently,  they shall not find me,
Prov. because they hated knowledge,  did not choose the fear of Jehovah.
Prov. They wanted none of my counsel. They despised all my reproof.
Prov. Therefore they shall eat of the fruit of their own way,  be filled with their own devices.
Prov. For the backsliding of the simple shall kill them,  the careless ease of fools shall destroy them.
Prov. But he who hearkens to me shall dwell securely,  shall be quiet without fear of evil.
Prov. My son, if thou will receive my words,  lay up my commandments with thee,
Prov. so as to incline thine ear to wisdom,  apply thy heart to understanding,
Prov. yea, if thou cry after discernment,  lift up thy voice for understanding,
Prov. if thou seek her as silver,  search for her as for hidden treasures,
Prov. then thou shall understand the fear of Jehovah,  find the knowledge of God.
Prov. For Jehovah gives wisdom. Out of his mouth is knowledge and understanding.
Prov. He lays up sound wisdom for the upright, a shield to those who walk in integrity,
Prov. that he may guard the paths of justice,  preserve the way of his sanctified.
Prov. Then thou shall understand righteousness and justice and equity, yea, every good path.
Prov. For wisdom shall enter into thy heart,  knowledge shall be pleasant to thy soul,
Prov. discretion shall watch over thee, understanding shall keep thee,
Prov. to deliver thee from the way of evil, from the men who speak perverse things,
Prov. who forsake the paths of uprightness to walk in the ways of darkness,
Prov. who rejoice to do evil,  delight in the perverseness of evil,
Prov. who are crooked in their ways,  wayward in their paths,
Prov. to deliver thee from the interloping woman, even from the stranger who flatters with her words,
Prov. who forsakes the companion of her youth,  forgets the covenant of her God
Prov. (for her house inclines to death,  her paths to the dead;
Prov. none who go to her return again, nor do they attain to the paths of life),
Prov. that thou may walk in the way of good men,  keep the paths of the righteous.
Prov. For the upright shall dwell in the land,  the perfect shall remain in it.
Prov. But the wicked shall be cut off from the land,  the treacherous shall be rooted out of it.
Prov. My son, do not forget my law,  let thy heart keep my commandments.
Prov. For length of days,  years of life,  peace, they will add to thee.
Prov. Let not kindness and truth forsake thee. Bind them about thy neck, write them upon the tablet of thy heart,
Prov. so thou shall find favor and good understanding in the sight of God and man.
Prov. Trust in Jehovah with all thy heart,  lean not upon thine own understanding.
Prov. In all thy ways acknowledge him,  he will direct thy paths.
Prov. Be not wise in thine own eyes. Fear Jehovah,  depart from evil.
Prov. It will be health to thy navel,  marrow to thy bones.
Prov. Honor Jehovah with thy substance,  with the first-fruits of all thine increase,
Prov. so thy barns shall be filled with plenty,  thy vats shall overflow with new wine.
Prov. My son, despise not the chastening of Jehovah, nor be weary of his reproof.
Prov. For whom Jehovah loves he reproves,  he whips every son whom he receives.
Prov. Happy is the man who finds wisdom,  the man who gets understanding.
Prov. For the gain of it is better than the gain of silver,  the profit of it than fine gold.
Prov. She is more precious than rubies,  none of the things thou can desire are to be compared to her.
Prov. Length of days is in her right hand, in her left hand are riches and honor.
Prov. Her ways are ways of pleasantness,  all her paths are peace.
Prov. She is a tree of life to those who lay hold upon her. And happy is everyone who retains her.
Prov. Jehovah by wisdom founded the earth. By understanding he established the heavens.
Prov. By his knowledge the depths were broken up,  the skies drop down the dew.
Prov. My son, let them not depart from thine eyes. Keep sound wisdom and discretion,
Prov. so they shall be life to thy soul,  grace to thy neck.
Prov. Then thou shall walk in thy way securely,  thy foot shall not stumble.
Prov. When thou lie down, thou shall not be afraid. Yea, thou shall lie down,  thy sleep shall be sweet.
Prov. Be not afraid of sudden fear, nor of the desolation of the wicked, when it comes.
Prov. For Jehovah will be thy confidence,  will keep thy foot from being taken.
Prov. Do not withhold good from those to whom it is due, when it is in the power of thy hand to do it.
Prov. Do not say to thy neighbor, Go,  come again,  tomorrow I will give, when thou have it by thee.
Prov. Do not devise evil against thy neighbor, since he dwells securely by thee.
Prov. Do not strive with a man without cause, if he has done thee no harm.
Prov. Do not envy thou the man of violence,  choose none of his ways.
Prov. For the perverse man is an abomination to Jehovah,  his friendship is with the upright.
Prov. The curse of Jehovah is in the house of a wicked man,  he blesses the habitation of the righteous.
Prov. Surely the Lord is opposed to the arrogant,  he gives grace to the lowly.
Prov. The wise shall inherit glory,  shame shall be the promotion of fools.
Prov. Hear, ye sons, the instruction of a father,  attend to know understanding.
Prov. For I give you good doctrine. Forsake ye not my law.
Prov. For I was a son to my father, tender and only beloved in the sight of my mother.
Prov. And he taught me,  said to me, Let thy heart retain my words. Keep my commandments,  live.
Prov. Get wisdom, get understanding. Do not forget, nor decline from the words of my mouth.
Prov. Do not forsake her,  she will preserve thee. Love her,  she will keep thee.
Prov. Wisdom is the principal thing. Get wisdom, yea, with all thy getting get understanding.
Prov. Exalt her,  she will promote thee. She will bring thee to honor when thou embrace her.
Prov. She will give to thy head a garland of grace, a crown of beauty she will deliver to thee.
Prov. Hear, O my son,  receive my sayings,  the years of thy life shall be many.
Prov. I have taught thee in the way of wisdom. I have led thee in paths of uprightness.
Prov. When thou go, thy steps shall not be restricted. And if thou run, thou shall not stumble.
Prov. Take firm hold of instruction. Do not let her go. Keep her, for she is thy life.
Prov. Enter not into the path of the wicked,  walk not in the way of evil men.
Prov. Avoid it. Do not pass by it. Turn from it,  pass on.
Prov. For they do not sleep unless they do evil. And their sleep is taken away unless they cause to fall.
Prov. For they eat the bread of wickedness,  drink the wine of violence.
Prov. But the path of the righteous is as the dawning light, that shines more and more to the perfect day.
Prov. The way of the wicked is as darkness. They know not at what they stumble.
Prov. My son, attend to my words. Incline thine ear to my sayings.
Prov. Let them not depart from thine eyes. Keep them in the midst of thy heart.
Prov. For they are life to those who find them,  health to all their flesh.
Prov. Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out of it are the issues of life.
Prov. Put away from thee a wayward mouth,  put perverse lips far from thee.
Prov. Let thine eyes look right on,  let thine eyelids look straight before thee.
Prov. Make the path of thy feet level,  let all thy ways be established.
Prov. Turn not to the right hand nor to the left. Remove thy foot from evil.
Prov. My son, attend to my wisdom. Incline thine ear to my understanding,
Prov. that thou may preserve discretion,  that thy lips may keep knowledge.
Prov. For the lips of an interloping woman drop honey,  her mouth is smoother than oil.
Prov. But in the end she is bitter as wormwood, sharp as a two-edged sword.
Prov. Her feet go down to death. Her steps take hold on Sheol,
Prov. so that she does not find the level path of life. Her ways are unstable,  she does not know.
Prov. Now therefore, ye sons, hearken to me,  do not depart from the words of my mouth.
Prov. Remove thy way far from her,  do not come near the door of her house,
Prov. lest thou give thine honor to others,  thy years to the cruel,
Prov. lest strangers be filled with thy strength,  thy labors be in the house of an alien,
Prov. and thou mourn at thy latter end when thy flesh and thy body are consumed,
Prov. and say, How I have hated instruction,  my heart despised reproof.
Prov. Neither have I obeyed the voice of my teachers, nor inclined my ear to those who instructed me!
Prov. I was almost in all evil in the midst of the assembly and congregation.
Prov. Drink waters out of thine own cistern,  running waters out of thine own well.
Prov. Should thy springs be dispersed abroad,  streams of water in the streets?
Prov. Let them be for thyself alone,  not for strangers with thee.
Prov. Let thy fountain be blessed,  rejoice in the wife of thy youth:
Prov. a loving hind and a pleasant doe. Let her breasts satisfy thee at all times,  be thou ravished always with her love.
Prov. For why should thou, my son, be ravished with an interloping woman,  embrace the bosom of a stranger?
Prov. For the ways of man are before the eyes of Jehovah,  he makes level all his paths.
Prov. His own iniquities shall take a wicked man,  he shall be held with the cords of his sin.
Prov. He shall die for lack of instruction. And in the greatness of his folly he shall go astray.
Prov. My son, if thou have become surety for thy neighbor, if thou have struck thy hands for a stranger,
Prov. thou are snared with the words of thy mouth, thou are taken with the words of thy mouth.
Prov. Do this now, my son,  deliver thyself, since thou have come into the hand of thy neighbor. Go, humble thyself,  importune thy neighbor.
Prov. Do not give sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eyelids.
Prov. Deliver thyself as a roe from the hand,  as a bird from the hand of the fowler.
Prov. Go to the ant, thou sluggard. Consider her ways,  be wise.
Prov. Which, having no chief, overseer, or ruler,
Prov. provides her bread in the summer,  gathers her food in the harvest.
Prov. How long will thou sleep, O sluggard? When will thou arise out of thy sleep?
Prov. A little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep,
Prov. so thy poverty shall come as a robber,  thy want as an armed man.
Prov. A worthless person, a man of iniquity, is he who walks with a perverse mouth,
Prov. who winks with his eyes, who speaks with his feet, who makes signs with his fingers,
Prov. in whose heart is perverseness, who devises evil continually, who sows discord.
Prov. Therefore his calamity shall come suddenly. Suddenly he shall be broken,  that without remedy.
Prov. There are six things which Jehovah hates, yea, seven which are an abomination to him:
Prov. haughty eyes, a lying tongue,  hands that shed innocent blood,
Prov. a heart that devises wicked purposes, feet that are swift in running to mischief,
Prov. a false witness who utters lies,  he who sows discord among brothers.
Prov. My son, keep the commandment of thy father,  do not forsake the law of thy mother.
Prov. Bind them continually upon thy heart. Tie them about thy neck.
Prov. When thou walk, it shall lead thee. When thou sleep, it shall watch over thee. And when thou awake, it shall talk with thee.
Prov. For the commandment is a lamp,  the law is light,  reproofs of instruction are the way of life,
Prov. to keep thee from the evil woman, from the flattery of the stranger's tongue.
Prov. Do not lust after her beauty in thy heart, nor let her take thee with her eyelids.
Prov. For the price of a harlot is as much as a piece of bread,  the adulteress hunts for the precious life.
Prov. Can a man take fire in his bosom,  his clothes not be burned?
Prov. Or can a man walk upon hot coals,  his feet not be scorched?
Prov. So is he who goes in to his neighbor's wife. Whoever touches her shall not be unpunished.
Prov. Men do not despise a thief, if he steals to satisfy himself when he is hungry.
Prov. Yet if he is found, he shall restore sevenfold. He shall give all the substance of his house.
Prov. He who commits adultery with a woman is void of understanding. He who would destroy his own soul does it.
Prov. Wounds and dishonor he shall get,  his reproach shall not be wiped away.
Prov. For jealousy is a man's fury,  he will not spare in the day of vengeance.
Prov. He will not regard any ransom, nor will he be satisfied, though thou give many gifts.
Prov. My son, keep my words,  lay up my commandments with thee.
Prov. Keep my commandments and live,  my law as the apple of thine eye.
Prov. Bind them upon thy fingers. Write them upon the tablet of thy heart.
Prov. Say to wisdom, Thou are my sister,  call understanding thy kinswoman,
Prov. that they may keep thee from the interloping woman, from the stranger who flatters with her words.
Prov. For at the window of my house I looked forth through my lattice,
Prov. and I beheld among the simple ones, I discerned among the youths, a young man void of understanding
Prov. passing through the street near her corner. And he went the way to her house,
Prov. in the twilight, in the evening of the day, in the middle of the night and in the darkness.
Prov. And, behold, there met him a woman attired like a harlot,  wily of heart.
Prov. She is loud and headstrong. Her feet abide not in her house.
Prov. Now she is in the streets, now in the broad places,  lies in wait at every corner.
Prov. So she caught him,  kissed him. With an impudent face she said to him,
Prov. Sacrifices of peace offerings are with me. I have paid my vows this day.
Prov. Therefore I came forth to meet thee, diligently to seek thy face,  I have found thee.
Prov. I have spread my couch with carpets of tapestry, with striped cloths of the yarn of Egypt.
Prov. I have perfumed my bed With myrrh, aloes,  cinnamon.
Prov. Come, let us take our fill of love until the morning. Let us solace ourselves with love.
Prov. For the man is not at home. He has gone a long journey.
Prov. He has taken a bag of money with him. He will come home at the full moon.
Prov. With her much fair speech she causes him to yield. With the flattering of her lips she forces him along.
Prov. He goes after her straightaway, as an ox goes to the slaughter, or as a fool to the correction of the stocks,
Prov. till an arrow strikes through his liver, as a bird hastens to the snare. And he does not know that it is for his life.
Prov. Now therefore, ye sons, hearken to me,  attend to the words of my mouth.
Prov. Let not thy heart decline to her ways. Go not astray in her paths.
Prov. For she has cast down many wounded. Yea, all her slain are a mighty host.
Prov. Her house is the way to Sheol, going down to the chambers of death.
Prov. Does not wisdom cry out,  understanding put forth her voice?
Prov. On the top of high places by the way, where the paths meet, she stands.
Prov. Beside the gates, at the entry of the city, at the coming in at the doors, she cries aloud:
Prov. To you, O men, I call. And my voice is to the sons of men.
Prov. O ye simple, understand prudence, , ye fools, be of an understanding heart.
Prov. Hear, for I will speak excellent things. And the opening of my lips shall be right things.
Prov. For my mouth shall utter truth. And wickedness is an abomination to my lips.
Prov. All the words of my mouth are in righteousness. There is nothing crooked or perverse in them.
Prov. They are all plain to him who understands,  right to those who find knowledge.
Prov. Receive my instruction,  not silver,  knowledge rather than choice gold.
Prov. For wisdom is better than rubies,  all the things that may be desired are not to be compared to it.
Prov. I, wisdom, have made prudence my dwelling,  find out knowledge and discretion.
Prov. The fear of Jehovah is to hate evil. Pride,  arrogance,  the evil way,  the perverse mouth, do I hate.
Prov. Counsel is mine,  sound knowledge. I am understanding, I have might.
Prov. By me kings reign,  rulers decree justice.
Prov. By me rulers rule,  ranking men, even all the judges of the earth.
Prov. I love those who love me,  those who seek me diligently shall find me.
Prov. Riches and honor are with me, durable wealth and righteousness.
Prov. My fruit is better than gold, yea, than fine gold,  my revenue than choice silver.
Prov. I walk in the way of righteousness, in the midst of the paths of justice,
Prov. that I may cause those who love me to inherit substance,  that I may fill their treasuries.
Prov. Jehovah possessed me in the beginning of his way, before his works of old.
Prov. I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning, before the earth was,
Prov. when there were no depths. I was brought forth when there were no fountains abounding with water,
Prov. before the mountains were settled, before the hills. I was brought forth
Prov. while as yet he had not made the earth, nor the fields, nor the beginning of the dust of the world.
Prov. When he established the heavens, I was there. When he set a circle upon the face of the deep,
Prov. when he made firm the skies above, when the fountains of the deep became strong,
Prov. when he gave to the sea its bound that the waters should not transgress his commandment, when he marked out the foundations of the earth,
Prov. then I was by him, a master workman. And I was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him,
Prov. rejoicing in his habitable earth. And my delight was with the sons of men.
Prov. Now therefore, ye sons, hearken to me. For blessed are those who keep my ways.
Prov. Hear instruction,  be wise,  do not refuse it.
Prov. Blessed is the man who hears me, watching daily at my gates, waiting at the posts of my doors.
Prov. For he who finds me finds life,  shall obtain favor of Jehovah.
Prov. But he who sins against me wrongs his own soul. All those who hate me love death.
Prov. Wisdom has built her house. She has hewn out her seven pillars.
Prov. She has killed her beasts. She has mingled her wine. She has also furnished her table.
Prov. She has sent forth her maidens. She cries out upon the highest places of the city:
Prov. He who is simple, let him turn in here. As for him who is void of understanding, she says to him,
Prov. Come, eat ye of my bread,  drink of the wine which I have mingled.
Prov. Forsake ye simpleness,  live,  walk in the way of understanding.
Prov. He who corrects a scoffer gets himself reviling. And he who reproves a wicked man gets himself a bruise.
Prov. Reprove not a scoffer, lest he hate thee. Reprove a wise man,  he will love thee.
Prov. Give opportunity to a wise man,  he will be yet wiser. Teach a righteous man,  he will increase in learning.
Prov. The fear of Jehovah is the beginning of wisdom,  the knowledge of the Holy is understanding.
Prov. For by me thy days shall be multiplied,  the years of thy life shall be increased.
Prov. If thou are wise, thou are wise for thyself. And if thou scoff, thou alone shall bear it.
Prov. The foolish woman is clamorous, simple,  knows nothing.
Prov. And she sits at the door of her house, on a seat in the high places of the city,
Prov. to call to those who pass by, who go right on their ways:
Prov. He who is simple, let him turn in here. And as for him who is void of understanding, she says to him,
Prov. Stolen waters are sweet,  bread in secret is pleasant.
Prov. But he knows not that the dead are there, that her guests are in the depths of Sheol.
Prov. The proverbs of Solomon. A wise son makes a glad father,  a foolish son is the heaviness of his mother.
Prov. Treasures of wickedness profit nothing,  righteousness delivers from death.
Prov. Jehovah will not allow the soul of a righteous man to famish,  he thrusts away the desire of the wicked.
Prov. He who works with a slack hand becomes poor,  the hand of the diligent makes rich.
Prov. He who gathers in summer is a wise son. He who sleeps in harvest is a son who causes shame.
Prov. Blessings are upon the head of a righteous man,  violence covers the mouth of the wicked.
Prov. The memory of a righteous man is blessed,  the name of the wicked shall rot.
Prov. The wise in heart will receive commandments,  a prating fool shall fall.
Prov. He who walks uprightly walks securely,  he who perverts his ways shall be known.
Prov. He who winks with the eye causes sorrow. And a prating fool shall fall.
Prov. The mouth of a righteous man is a fountain of life,  violence covers the mouth of the wicked.
Prov. Hatred stirs up strife,  love covers all transgressions.
Prov. In the lips of him who has discernment wisdom is found,  a rod is for the back of him who is void of understanding.
Prov. Wise men lay up knowledge,  the mouth of a foolish man is a present destruction.
Prov. The rich man's wealth is his strong city. The destruction of the poor is their poverty.
Prov. The labor of a righteous man produces life. The fruit of a wicked man is to sin.
Prov. He is in the way of life who heeds correction,  he who forsakes reproof errs.
Prov. He who hides hatred is of lying lips. And he who utters a slander is a fool.
Prov. Transgression is not lacking in the multitude of words,  he who refrains his lips does wisely.
Prov. The tongue of a righteous man is choice silver. The heart of the wicked is little worth.
Prov. The lips of a righteous man feeds many,  the foolish die for lack of understanding.
Prov. The blessing of Jehovah, it makes rich,  he adds no sorrow with it.
Prov. It is as sport to a fool to do mischief,  so is wisdom to a man of understanding.
Prov. The fear of a wicked man shall come upon him. And the desire of the righteous shall be granted.
Prov. When the whirlwind passes, the wicked man is no more,  the righteous man is an everlasting foundation.
Prov. As vinegar to the teeth,  as smoke to the eyes, so is the sluggard to those who send him.
Prov. The fear of Jehovah prolongs days,  the years of the wicked shall be shortened.
Prov. The hope of the righteous is gladness,  the expectation of the wicked shall perish.
Prov. The way of Jehovah is a stronghold to the upright,  it is a destruction to the workers of iniquity.
Prov. A righteous man shall never be removed,  the wicked shall not dwell in the land.
Prov. The mouth of a righteous man brings forth wisdom,  the perverse tongue shall be cut off.
Prov. The lips of a righteous man knows what is acceptable,  the mouth of the wicked is perverseness.
Prov. A false balance is an abomination to Jehovah,  a just weight is his delight.
Prov. When pride comes, then comes shame,  with the lowly is wisdom.
Prov. The integrity of the upright shall guide them,  the perverseness of the treacherous shall destroy them.
Prov. Riches do not profit in the day of wrath,  righteousness delivers from death.
Prov. The righteousness of the perfect shall direct his way,  the wicked man shall fall by his own wickedness.
Prov. The righteousness of the upright shall deliver them,  the treacherous shall be taken in their own iniquity.
Prov. When a wicked man dies, his expectation shall perish,  the hope of iniquity perishes.
Prov. A righteous man is delivered out of trouble,  a wicked man comes in his stead.
Prov. The hypocrite destroys his neighbor with his mouth,  the righteous shall be delivered through knowledge.
Prov. When it goes well with the righteous, the city rejoices. And when the wicked perish, there is shouting.
Prov. By the blessing of the upright the city is exalted,  it is overthrown by the mouth of the wicked.
Prov. He who despises his neighbor is void of wisdom,  a man of understanding holds his peace.
Prov. He who goes around as a tale-bearer reveals secrets,  he who is of a faithful spirit conceals a matter.
Prov. Where no wise guidance is, the people fall,  in the multitude of counselors there is safety.
Prov. He who is surety for a stranger shall smart for it,  he who hates suretyship is secure.
Prov. A gracious woman obtains honor,  aggressive men obtain riches.
Prov. The merciful man does good to his own soul,  he who is cruel troubles his own flesh.
Prov. A wicked man earns deceitful wages,  he who sows righteousness has a sure reward.
Prov. He who is steadfast in righteousness comes to life,  he who pursues evil comes to his own death.
Prov. Those who are perverse in heart are an abomination to Jehovah,  such as are perfect in their way are his delight.
Prov. Hand in hand, the evil man shall not be unpunished,  the seed of the righteous shall be delivered.
Prov. A ring of gold in a swine's snout, is a beautiful woman who is without discretion.
Prov. The desire of the righteous is only good. The expectation of the wicked is wrath.
Prov. There is he who scatters,  increases yet more,  there he is who withholds more than is proper,  only to want.
Prov. The generous soul shall be made prosperous,  he who waters shall also be watered himself.
Prov. The people shall curse him who withholds grain,  a blessing shall be upon the head of him who sells it.
Prov. He who diligently seeks good seeks favor,  he who searches after evil, it shall come to him.
Prov. He who trusts in his riches shall fall,  the righteous shall flourish as the green leaf.
Prov. He who troubles his own house shall inherit the wind. And a foolish man shall be servant to a wise man of heart.
Prov. The fruit of a righteous man is a tree of life,  he who is wise wins souls.
Prov. Behold, a righteous man shall be recompensed in the earth, how much more the wicked man and the sinner!
Prov. He who loves correction loves knowledge,  he who hates reproof is brutish.
Prov. A good man shall obtain favor of Jehovah,  he will condemn a man of wicked devices.
Prov. A man shall not be established by wickedness,  the root of the righteous shall not be moved.
Prov. A worthy woman is the crown of her husband,  she who makes ashamed is as rottenness in his bones.
Prov. The thoughts of the righteous are just. The counsels of the wicked are deceit.
Prov. The words of the wicked lie in wait for blood,  the mouth of the upright shall deliver them.
Prov. The wicked are overthrown,  are not,  the house of the righteous shall stand.
Prov. A man shall be commended according to his wisdom,  he who is of a perverse heart shall be despised.
Prov. Better is he who is lightly esteemed,  has a servant, than he who honors himself,  lacks bread.
Prov. A righteous man regards the life of his beast,  the tender mercies of the wicked are cruel.
Prov. He who tills his land shall have plenty of bread,  he who pursues vanities is void of understanding.
Prov. A wicked man desires the net of evil men,  the root of the righteous gives.
Prov. A wicked man is snared by the transgression of his lips,  the righteous shall come out of trouble.
Prov. A man shall be satisfied with good by the fruit of his mouth,  the actions of a man's hands shall be rendered to him.
Prov. The way of a fool is right in his own eyes,  he who is wise hearkens to counsel.
Prov. A fool's vexation is instantly known,  a prudent man conceals shame.
Prov. He who utters truth shows forth righteousness,  a false witness, deceit.
Prov. There is he who speaks rashly like the piercings of a sword,  the tongue of the wise is health.
Prov. The lips of truth shall be established forever,  a lying tongue is but for a moment.
Prov. Deceit is in the heart of those who devise evil,  joy is to the counselors of peace.
Prov. There shall no mischief happen to a righteous man,  the wicked shall be filled with evil.
Prov. Lying lips are an abomination to Jehovah,  those who deal truly are his delight.
Prov. A prudent man conceals knowledge,  the heart of fools proclaims foolishness.
Prov. The hand of the diligent shall bear rule,  the slothful shall be put under task work.
Prov. Heaviness in the heart of a man makes it droop,  a good word makes it glad.
Prov. A righteous man is a guide to his neighbor,  the way of the wicked causes them to err.
Prov. The slothful man roasts not that which he took in hunting,  the substance of a diligent man is precious.
Prov. Life is in the way of righteousness,  in the pathway thereof there is no death.
Prov. A wise son hears his father's instruction,  a scoffer listens not to rebuke.
Prov. A man shall eat good by the fruit of his mouth,  the soul of the treacherous, violence.
Prov. He who guards his mouth keeps his life. He who opens wide his lips shall have destruction.
Prov. The soul of the sluggard desires,  has nothing,  the soul of the diligent shall be made fat.
Prov. A righteous man hates lying,  a wicked man is loathsome,  comes to shame.
Prov. Righteousness guards him who is upright in the way,  wickedness overthrows the sinner.
Prov. There is he who makes himself rich, yet has nothing,  he who makes himself poor, yet has great wealth.
Prov. The ransom of a man's life is his riches,  the poor hears no threatening.
Prov. The light of the righteous rejoices,  the lamp of the wicked shall be put out.
Prov. Through pride a vain man causes contention,  wisdom is with the well-advised.
Prov. Wealth gotten by vanity shall be diminished,  he who gathers by labor shall have increase.
Prov. Hope deferred makes the heart sick,  when the desire comes, it is a tree of life.
Prov. He who despises the word brings destruction on himself,  he who fears the commandment shall be rewarded.
Prov. The law of a wise man is a fountain of life, to depart from the snares of death.
Prov. Good understanding gives favor,  the way of the transgressor is hard.
Prov. Every prudent man works with knowledge,  a fool flaunts folly.
Prov. A wicked messenger falls into evil,  a faithful ambassador is health.
Prov. Poverty and shame are to him who refuses correction,  he who regards reproof shall be honored.
Prov. The desire accomplished is sweet to the soul,  it is an abomination to fools to depart from evil.
Prov. Walk with wise men,  thou shall be wise. But the companion of fools shall smart for it.
Prov. Evil pursues sinners,  the righteous shall be recompensed with good.
Prov. A good man leaves an inheritance to his son's sons,  the wealth of the sinner is laid up for the righteous.
Prov. Much food is in the tillage of the poor,  there is that is consumed because of injustice.
Prov. He who spares his rod hates his son,  he who loves him chastens him promptly.
Prov. A righteous man eats to the satisfying of his soul,  the belly of the wicked shall want.
Prov. Every wise woman builds her house,  a foolish woman plucks it down with her own hands.
Prov. He who walks in his uprightness fears Jehovah,  he who is perverse in his ways despises him.
Prov. In the mouth of a fool is a rod of pride,  the lips of the wise shall preserve them.
Prov. Where no oxen are, the crib is clean,  by the strength of the ox is much increase.
Prov. A faithful witness will not lie,  a false witness utters lies.
Prov. A scoffer seeks wisdom,  finds it not,  knowledge is easy to him who has understanding.
Prov. Go into the presence of a foolish man,  thou shall not perceive the lips of knowledge.
Prov. The wisdom of a prudent man is to understand his way,  the folly of fools is deceit.
Prov. Fools mock at sin,  among the upright there is good will.
Prov. The heart knows its own bitterness,  a stranger does not intermeddle with its joy.
Prov. The house of the wicked shall be overthrown,  the tent of the upright shall flourish.
Prov. There is a way which seems right to a man,  the end thereof are the ways of death.
Prov. Even in laughter the heart is sorrowful,  the end of mirth is heaviness.
Prov. The backslider in heart shall be filled with his own ways,  a good man from his own fruits.
Prov. A simple man believes every word,  the prudent man looks well to his going.
Prov. A wise man fears,  departs from evil,  the fool bears himself insolently,  is confident.
Prov. He who is soon angry will deal foolishly. And a man of wicked devices is hated.
Prov. The simple inherit folly,  the prudent are crowned with knowledge.
Prov. The evil bow down before the good,  the wicked at the gates of the righteous.
Prov. The poor man is regarded inferior even by his own neighbor,  the rich man has many friends.
Prov. He who despises his neighbor sins,  he who has pity on the poor, happy is he.
Prov. Do they not err who devise evil? But mercy and truth are to those who devise good.
Prov. In all labor there is profit,  the talk of the lips tends only to poverty.
Prov. The crown of the wise is their riches. The foolishness of fools is folly.
Prov. A true witness delivers souls,  he who utters lies causes deceit.
Prov. In the fear of Jehovah is strong confidence,  his sons shall have a place of refuge.
Prov. The fear of Jehovah is a fountain of life, to depart from the snares of death.
Prov. In the multitude of people is the king's glory,  in the want of people is the destruction of the prince.
Prov. He who is slow to anger is of great understanding,  he who is hasty of spirit exalts folly.
Prov. A tranquil heart is the life of the flesh,  envy is the rottenness of the bones.
Prov. He who oppresses a poor man reproaches his maker,  he who has mercy on a needy man honors him.
Prov. An evil man is thrust down in his evil-doing,  a righteous man has hope in his death.
Prov. Wisdom rests in the heart of him who has understanding,  what is in the inward part of fools is made known.
Prov. Righteousness exalts a nation,  sin is a reproach to any people.
Prov. The king's favor is toward a servant who deals wisely,  his wrath will be to him who causes shame.
Prov. A soft answer turns away wrath,  a grievous word stirs up anger.
Prov. The tongue of the wise utters knowledge rightly,  the mouth of fools pours out folly.
Prov. The eyes of Jehovah are in every place, keeping watch upon the evil and the good.
Prov. A gentle tongue is a tree of life,  perverseness in it is a breaking of the spirit.
Prov. A fool despises his father's correction,  he who regards reproof gets prudence.
Prov. In the house of a righteous man is much treasure,  in the revenues of a wicked man is trouble.
Prov. The lips of the wise disperse knowledge,  the heart of the foolish, not so.
Prov. The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to Jehovah,  the prayer of the upright is his delight.
Prov. The way of a wicked man is an abomination to Jehovah,  he loves him who follows after righteousness.
Prov. There is grievous correction for him who forsakes the way. He who hates reproof shall die.
Prov. Sheol and Abaddon are before Jehovah. How much more then the hearts of the sons of men!
Prov. A scoffer does not like to be reproved. He will not go to the wise.
Prov. A glad heart makes a cheerful countenance,  by sorrow of heart the spirit is broken.
Prov. The heart of him who has understanding seeks knowledge,  the mouth of fools feeds on folly.
Prov. All the days of the afflicted are evil,  he who is of a cheerful heart has a continual feast.
Prov. Better is little with the fear of Jehovah, than great treasure and trouble with it.
Prov. Better is a dinner of herbs where love is, than a fatted ox and hatred with it.
Prov. A wrathful man stirs up contention,  he who is slow to anger appeases strife.
Prov. The way of the sluggard is as a hedge of thorns,  the path of the upright is made a highway.
Prov. A wise son makes a glad father,  a foolish man despises his mother.
Prov. Folly is joy to him who is void of wisdom,  a man of understanding makes his going straight.
Prov. Where there is no counsel, plans are disappointed,  in the multitude of counselors they are established.
Prov. A man has joy in the answer of his mouth,  a word in due season, how good it is!
Prov. To the wise man the way of life is upward, that he may depart from Sheol beneath.
Prov. Jehovah will root up the house of the proud,  he will establish the border of the widow.
Prov. Evil devices are an abomination to Jehovah,  pleasant words are pure.
Prov. He who is greedy of gain troubles his own house,  he who hates bribes shall live.
Prov. The heart of a righteous man meditates to answer,  the mouth of the wicked pours out evil things.
Prov. Jehovah is far from the wicked,  he hears the prayer of the righteous.
Prov. The light of the eyes rejoices the heart. Good news make the bones fat.
Prov. The ear that hearkens to the reproof of life shall abide among the wise.
Prov. He who refuses correction despises his own soul,  he who hearkens to reproof gets understanding.
Prov. The fear of Jehovah is the instruction of wisdom,  before honor is humility.
Prov. The plans of the heart belong to man,  the answer of the tongue is from Jehovah.
Prov. All the ways of a man are clean in his own eyes,  Jehovah weighs the spirits.
Prov. Commit thy works to Jehovah,  thy purposes shall be established.
Prov. Jehovah has made everything for its own end, yea, even the wicked for the day of evil.
Prov. Everyone who is proud in heart is an abomination to Jehovah. Hand in hand, he shall not be unpunished.
Prov. By mercy and truth iniquity is atoned for,  by the fear of Jehovah men depart from evil.
Prov. When a man's ways please Jehovah, he makes even his enemies to be at peace with him.
Prov. Better is a little, with righteousness, than great revenues with injustice.
Prov. A man's heart devises his way,  Jehovah directs his steps.
Prov. A divine sentence is in the lips of the king. His mouth shall not transgress in judgment.
Prov. A just balance and scales are Jehovah's. All the weights of the bag are his work.
Prov. It is an abomination to kings to commit wickedness, for the throne is established by righteousness.
Prov. Righteous lips are the delight of kings,  they love him who speaks right.
Prov. The wrath of a king is messengers of death,  a wise man will pacify it.
Prov. In the light of the king's countenance is life,  his favor is as a cloud of the latter rain.
Prov. How much better it is to get wisdom than gold! Yea, to get understanding is rather to be chosen than silver.
Prov. The highway of the upright is to depart from evil. He who keeps his way preserves his soul.
Prov. Pride is before destruction,  a haughty spirit before a fall.
Prov. Better it is to be of a lowly spirit with the poor, than to divide the spoil with the proud.
Prov. He who gives heed to the word shall find good,  whoever trusts in Jehovah, happy is he.
Prov. The wise in heart shall be called prudent,  the sweetness of the lips increases learning.
Prov. Understanding is a well-spring of life to him who has it,  the correction of fools is folly.
Prov. The heart of the wise instructs his mouth,  adds learning to his lips.
Prov. Pleasant words are a honeycomb: Sweet to the soul,  health to the bones.
Prov. There is a way which seems right to a man,  the end thereof are the ways of death.
Prov. The appetite of the laboring man labors for him, for his mouth urges him.
Prov. A worthless man devises mischief,  in his lips there is as a scorching fire.
Prov. A perverse man scatters abroad strife,  a whisperer separates chief friends.
Prov. A man of violence entices his neighbor,  leads him in a way that is not good.
Prov. He who shuts his eyes devises perverse things. He who moves his lips brings evil to pass.
Prov. The hoary head is a crown of glory. It shall be found in the way of righteousness.
Prov. He who is slow to anger is better than the mighty,  he who rules his spirit, than he who takes a city.
Prov. The lot is cast into the lap,  the whole disposing thereof is of Jehovah.
Prov. Better is a dry morsel,  quietness with it, than a house full of feasting with strife.
Prov. A servant who deals wisely shall have rule over a son who causes shame,  shall have part in the inheritance among the brothers.
Prov. The refining pot is for silver,  the furnace for gold,  Jehovah tries the hearts.
Prov. An evildoer gives heed to wicked lips. A liar gives ear to a mischievous tongue.
Prov. He who mocks a poor man reproaches his maker. He who is glad at calamity shall not be unpunished.
Prov. Son's sons are the crown of old men,  the glory of sons are their fathers.
Prov. Excellent speech is not appropriate to a fool, much less lying lips to a prince.
Prov. A bribe is a precious stone in the eyes of him who has it; wherever it turns, it prospers.
Prov. He who covers a transgression seeks love,  he who repeats a matter separates chief friends.
Prov. A rebuke enters deeper into him who has understanding than a hundred stripes into a fool.
Prov. An evil man seeks only rebellion. Therefore a cruel messenger shall be sent against him.
Prov. Let a man meet a bear robbed of her cubs, rather than a fool in his folly.
Prov. He who rewards evil for good, evil shall not depart from his house.
Prov. The beginning of strife is like letting out water. Therefore leave off contention, before there is quarrelling.
Prov. He who justifies a wicked man,  he who condemns a righteous man, both of them alike are an abomination to Jehovah.
Prov. Why is there a price in the hand of a fool to buy wisdom, since he has no understanding?
Prov. A friend loves at all times,  a brother is born for adversity.
Prov. A man void of understanding strikes hands,  becomes surety in the presence of his neighbor.
Prov. He loves transgression who loves strife. He who raises high his gate seeks destruction.
Prov. He who has a wayward heart finds no good,  he who has a perverse tongue falls into mischief.
Prov. He who begets a fool it is to his sorrow,  the father of a fool has no joy.
Prov. A cheerful heart is a good medicine,  a broken spirit dries up the bones.
Prov. A wicked man receives a bribe out of the bosom, to pervert the ways of justice.
Prov. Wisdom is before the face of him who has understanding,  the eyes of a fool are in the ends of the earth.
Prov. A foolish son is a grief to his father,  bitterness to her who bore him.
Prov. Also to punish a righteous man is not good, nor to smite nobles for uprightness.
Prov. He who spares his words has knowledge,  he who is of a cool spirit is a man of understanding.
Prov. Even a fool, when he holds his peace, is considered wise. When he shuts his lips, he is prudent.
Prov. He who desires to separate himself seeks excuses,  rages against all sound wisdom.
Prov. A fool has no delight in understanding,  only that his heart may reveal itself.
Prov. When a wicked man comes, contempt also comes,  with disgrace, reproach.
Prov. The words of a man's mouth are deep waters. The wellspring of wisdom is a flowing brook.
Prov. To respect the person of a wicked man is not good, nor to turn aside a righteous man in judgment.
Prov. A fool's lips enter into contention,  his mouth calls for stripes.
Prov. A fool's mouth is his destruction,  his lips are the snare of his soul.
Prov. The words of a whisperer are as dainty morsels,  they go down into the innermost parts.
Prov. He also that is slack in his work is brother to him that is a destroyer.
Prov. The name of Jehovah is a strong tower. A righteous man runs into it,  is safe.
Prov. The rich man's wealth is his strong city,  as a high wall in his own imagination.
Prov. Before destruction the heart of man is haughty,  before honor is humility.
Prov. He who gives answer before he hears, it is folly and shame to him.
Prov. The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity,  a broken spirit who can bear?
Prov. The heart of a prudent man gets knowledge,  the ear of the wise seeks knowledge.
Prov. A man's gift makes room for him,  brings him before great men.
Prov. He who pleads his case first seems just,  his neighbor comes and searches him out.
Prov. The lot causes contentions to cease,  decides between the mighty.
Prov. A brother offended is harder to be won than a strong city,  such contentions are like the bars of a castle.
Prov. A man's belly shall be filled with the fruit of his mouth. With the increase of his lips he shall be satisfied.
Prov. Death and life are in the power of the tongue,  those who love it shall eat the fruit of it.
Prov. He who finds a wife finds a good thing,  obtains favor from Jehovah.
Prov. A poor man uses entreaties,  a rich man answers roughly.
Prov. He who makes many friends does it to his own destruction,  there is a friend who sticks closer than a brother.
Prov. Better is a poor man who walks in his integrity than he who is perverse in his lips and is a fool.
Prov. Also, that the soul be without knowledge is not good. And he who hastens with his feet sins.
Prov. The foolishness of a man subverts his way,  his heart rages against Jehovah.
Prov. Wealth adds many friends,  a poor man is separated from his friend.
Prov. A false witness shall not be unpunished,  he who utters lies shall not escape.
Prov. Many will entreat the favor of a generous man,  every man is a friend to him who gives gifts.
Prov. All the brothers of a poor man regard him inferior, how much more do his friends go far from him! He pursues with words,  they are gone.
Prov. He who gets wisdom loves his own soul. He who keeps understanding shall find good.
Prov. A false witness shall not be unpunished,  he who utters lies shall perish.
Prov. Luxurious living is not fitting for a fool, much less for a servant to have rule over rulers.
Prov. The discretion of a man makes him slow to anger,  it is his glory to pass over a transgression.
Prov. The king's wrath is as the roaring of a lion,  his favor is as dew upon the grass.
Prov. A foolish son is the calamity of his father,  the contentions of a wife are a continual dropping.
Prov. House and riches are an inheritance from fathers,  a prudent wife is from Jehovah.
Prov. Slothfulness casts into a deep sleep,  the idle soul shall suffer hunger.
Prov. He who keeps the commandment keeps his soul. He who is careless of his ways shall die.
Prov. He who has pity upon a poor man lends to Jehovah,  he will repay him his good deed.
Prov. Chasten thy son while there is hope,  let not thy soul spare for his crying.
Prov. A man of great wrath shall bear the penalty, for if thou deliver him, thou must do it yet again.
Prov. Hear counsel,  receive instruction, that thou may be wise in thy latter end.
Prov. There are many devices in a man's heart,  the counsel of Jehovah, that shall stand.
Prov. That which makes a man to be desired is his kindness,  a poor man is better than a liar.
Prov. The fear of Jehovah is life to a man,  he shall abide satisfied. He shall not be visited with evil.
Prov. The sluggard buries his hand in the dish,  will not so much as bring it to his mouth again.
Prov. Smite a scoffer,  a simple man will learn prudence. And reprove him who has understanding,  he will understand knowledge.
Prov. He who does violence to his father,  chases away his mother, is a son that causes shame and brings reproach.
Prov. To err from the words of knowledge, cease, my son, to hear instruction.
Prov. A worthless witness mocks at justice,  the mouth of the wicked swallows iniquity.
Prov. Judgments are prepared for scoffers,  stripes for the back of fools.
Prov. Wine is a mocker, strong drink a brawler,  whoever errs thereby is not wise.
Prov. The terror of a king is as the roaring of a lion. He who provokes him to anger sins against his own life.
Prov. It is an honor for a man to keep aloof from strife,  every fool will be quarrelling.
Prov. The sluggard will not plow because of the winter. Therefore he shall beg in harvest,  have nothing.
Prov. Purpose in the heart of man is deep water,  a man of understanding will draw it out.
Prov. Most men will proclaim every one his own goodness,  a faithful man who can find?
Prov. A righteous man who walks in his integrity, blessed are his sons after him.
Prov. A king who sits on the throne of judgment scatters away all evil with his eyes.
Prov. Who can say, I have made my heart clean. I am pure from my sin?
Prov. Diverse weights,  diverse measures, both of them alike are an abomination to Jehovah.
Prov. Even a child makes himself known by his doings, whether his work be pure,  whether it be right.
Prov. The hearing ear,  the seeing eye, Jehovah has made even both of them.
Prov. Love not sleep, lest thou come to poverty. Open thine eyes,  thou shall be satisfied with bread.
Prov. It is bad, it is bad, says the buyer,  when he is gone his way, then he boasts.
Prov. There is gold,  abundance of rubies,  the lips of knowledge are a precious jewel.
Prov. Take his garment who is surety for a stranger,  hold him in pledge for foreigners.
Prov. Bread of falsehood is sweet to a man,  afterwards his mouth shall be filled with gravel.
Prov. Every purpose is established by counsel,  by wise guidance make thou war.
Prov. He who goes about as a tale-bearer reveals secrets. Therefore do not associate with him who opens wide his lips.
Prov. He who curses his father or his mother, his lamp shall be put out in blackness of darkness.
Prov. An inheritance gotten hastily at the beginning shall not be blessed in the end.
Prov. Say thou not, I will recompense evil. Wait for Jehovah,  he will save thee.
Prov. Diverse weights are an abomination to Jehovah,  a false balance is not good.
Prov. A man's goings are of Jehovah, how then can man understand his way?
Prov. It is a snare to a man to say rashly, It is holy. And to make inquiry after vows.
Prov. A wise king winnows the wicked,  brings the wheel over them.
Prov. The spirit of man is the lamp of Jehovah, searching all his innermost parts.
Prov. Kindness and truth preserve the king,  his throne is upheld by kindness.
Prov. The glory of young men is their strength,  the beauty of old men is the hoary head.
Prov. Stripes that wound cleanse away evil,  strokes, the innermost parts.
Prov. The king's heart is in the hand of Jehovah as streams of water. He turns it wherever he will.
Prov. Every way of a man is right in his own eyes,  Jehovah weighs the hearts.
Prov. To do righteousness and justice is more acceptable to Jehovah than sacrifice.
Prov. A high look,  a proud heart, even the lamp of the wicked, is sin.
Prov. The thoughts of a diligent man lead only to abundance,  everyone who is hasty, only to want.
Prov. The getting of treasures by a lying tongue is a vapor driven to and fro by those who seek death.
Prov. The violence of the wicked shall sweep them away, because they refuse to do justice.
Prov. The way of him who is laden with guilt is exceedingly crooked,  as for a pure man, his work is right.
Prov. It is better to dwell in the corner of the housetop, than with a contentious woman in a wide house.
Prov. The soul of a wicked man desires evil. His neighbor finds no favor in his eyes.
Prov. When a scoffer is punished, a simple man is made wise,  when a wise man is instructed, he receives knowledge.
Prov. A righteous man considers the house of the wicked: the wicked are overthrown to ruin.
Prov. He who stops his ears at the cry of a poor man, he also shall cry,  shall not be heard.
Prov. A gift in secret pacifies anger,  a present in the bosom, strong wrath.
Prov. It is joy to the righteous to do justice,  it is a destruction to the workers of iniquity.
Prov. The man who wanders out of the way of understanding shall rest in the assembly of the dead.
Prov. He who loves pleasure shall be a poor man. He who loves wine and oil shall not be rich.
Prov. A wicked man is a ransom for a righteous man,  the treacherous dealer for the upright.
Prov. It is better to dwell in a desert land, than with a contentious and fretful woman.
Prov. There is precious treasure and oil in the dwelling of a wise man,  a foolish man swallows it up.
Prov. He who follows after righteousness and kindness finds life, righteousness,  honor.
Prov. A wise man scales the city of the mighty,  brings down the strength of the confidence of it.
Prov. He who keeps his mouth and his tongue keeps his soul from troubles.
Prov. The proud and haughty man, scoffer is his name. He works in the arrogance of pride.
Prov. The desire of the sluggard kills him, for his hands refuse to labor.
Prov. There is he who covets greedily all the day long,  the righteous gives and does not withhold.
Prov. The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination. How much more when he brings it with a wicked mind!
Prov. A false witness shall perish,  the man who hears shall speak so as to endure.
Prov. A wicked man hardens his face,  as for an upright man, he establishes his ways.
Prov. There is no wisdom nor understanding nor counsel against Jehovah.
Prov. The horse is prepared against the day of battle,  victory is from Jehovah.
Prov. A good name is rather to be chosen than great riches, loving favor rather than silver and gold.
Prov. The rich and the poor meet together. Jehovah is the maker of them all.
Prov. A prudent man sees the evil,  hides himself,  the simple pass on,  suffer for it.
Prov. The reward of humility and the fear of Jehovah is riches and honor and life.
Prov. Thorns and snares are in the way of a perverse man. He who keeps his soul shall be far from them.
Prov. Train up a child in the way he should go,  even when he is old he will not depart from it.
Prov. The rich rule over the poor,  the borrower is servant to the lender.
Prov. He who sows iniquity shall reap calamity,  the rod of his wrath shall fail.
Prov. He who has a bountiful eye shall be blessed, for he gives of his bread to the poor.
Prov. Cast out the scoffer,  contention will go out, yea, strife and reproach will cease.
Prov. He who loves pureness of heart, for the grace of his lips, the king will be his friend.
Prov. The eyes of Jehovah preserve knowledge,  he overthrows the words of the treacherous man.
Prov. The sluggard says, There is a lion outside. I shall be slain in the streets.
Prov. The mouth of interloping women is a deep pit. He who is abhorred of Jehovah shall fall in it.
Prov. Foolishness is bound up in the heart of a child,  the rod of correction shall drive it far from him.
Prov. He who oppresses a poor man to his increase,  he who gives to a rich man, comes only to want.
Prov. Incline thine ear,  hear the words of the wise,  apply thy heart to my knowledge.
Prov. For it is a pleasant thing if thou keep them within thee, if they be established together upon thy lips.
Prov. That thy trust may be in Jehovah, I have made them known to thee this day, even to thee.
Prov. Have I not written to thee excellent things of counsels and knowledge,
Prov. to make thee know the certainty of the words of truth, that thou may carry back words of truth to those who send thee?
Prov. Do not rob a poor man, because he is poor, nor oppress an afflicted man in the gate.
Prov. For Jehovah will plead their cause,  despoil of life those who despoil them.
Prov. Make no friendship with a man who is given to anger,  thou shall not go with a wrathful man,
Prov. lest thou learn this ways,  get a snare to thy soul.
Prov. Be thou not one of those who strike hands, or of those who are sureties for debts.
Prov. If thou have not wherewith to pay, why should he take away thy bed from under thee?
Prov. Remove not the ancient landmark, which thy fathers have set.
Prov. See thou a man diligent in his business? He shall stand before kings; he shall not stand before obscure men.
Prov. When thou sit to eat with a ruler, consider diligently him who is before thee,
Prov. and put a knife to thy throat if thou be a man given to appetite.
Prov. Be not desirous of his dainties, since they are deceitful food.
Prov. Weary not thyself to be rich. Out of thine own wisdom, cease.
Prov. Will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? For it certainly makes itself wings, like an eagle that flies toward heaven.
Prov. Eat thou not the bread of an evil eye, nor desire thou his dainties.
Prov. For as he thinks within himself, so is he. Eat and drink, he says to thee,  his heart is not with thee.
Prov. The morsel which thou have eaten thou shall vomit up,  lose thy sweet words.
Prov. Speak not in the hearing of a fool, for he will despise the wisdom of thy words.
Prov. Remove not the ancient landmark. And enter not into the fields of the fatherless,
Prov. for their Redeemer is strong. He will plead their cause against thee.
Prov. Apply thy heart to instruction,  thine ears to the words of knowledge.
Prov. Withhold not correction from the child, for if thou beat him with the rod, he will not die.
Prov. Thou shall beat him with the rod,  shall deliver his soul from Sheol.
Prov. My son, if thy heart be wise, my heart will be glad, even mine.
Prov. Yea, my heart will rejoice when thy lips speak right things.
Prov. Let not thy heart envy sinners,  be thou in the fear of Jehovah all the day long.
Prov. For surely there is a reward,  thy hope shall not be cut off.
Prov. Hear thou, my son,  be wise,  guide thy heart in the way.
Prov. Be not among winebibbers, among gluttonous eaters of flesh.
Prov. For the drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty,  drowsiness will clothe a man with rags.
Prov. Hearken to thy father who begot thee,  despise not thy mother when she is old.
Prov. Buy the truth,  do not sell it, yea, wisdom,  instruction,  understanding.
Prov. The father of a righteous man will greatly rejoice,  he who begets a wise son will have joy of him.
Prov. Let thy father and thy mother be glad,  let her who bore thee rejoice.
Prov. My son, give me thy heart,  let thine eyes delight in my ways.
Prov. For a harlot is a deep ditch,  an interloping woman is a narrow pit.
Prov. Yea, she lies in wait as a robber,  increases the treacherous among men.
Prov. Who has woe? Who has sorrow? Who has contentions? Who has complaining? Who has wounds without cause? Who has redness of eyes?
Prov. Those who tarry long at the wine. Those who go to seek out mixed wine.
Prov. Look not thou upon the wine when it is red, when it sparkles in the cup, when it goes down smoothly.
Prov. At the end it bites like a serpent,  stings like an adder.
Prov. Thine eyes shall behold strange things,  thy heart shall utter perverse things.
Prov. Yea, thou shall be as he who lies down in the midst of the sea, or as he who lies upon the top of a mast.
Prov. They have stricken me, thou shall say,  I was not hurt. They have beaten me,  I did not feel it. When shall I awake? I will seek it yet again.
Prov. Be not thou envious against evil men, nor desire to be with them.
Prov. For their heart meditates oppression,  their lips talk of mischief.
Prov. Through wisdom a house is built,  by understanding it is established,
Prov. and by knowledge the chambers are filled with all precious and pleasant riches.
Prov. A wise man is strong, yea, a man of knowledge increases might.
Prov. For by wise guidance thou shall make thy war,  in the multitude of counselors there is safety.
Prov. Wisdom is too high for a fool. He opens not his mouth in the gate.
Prov. He who devises to do evil, men shall call him a mischief-maker.
Prov. The thought of folly is sin. And the scoffer is an abomination to men.
Prov. If thou faint in the day of adversity, thy strength is small.
Prov. Deliver those who are carried away to death,  hold thou back those who are ready to be slain.
Prov. If thou say, Behold, we did not know this, Does not he who weighs the hearts consider it? And he who keeps thy soul, does he not know it? And shall not he render to every man according to his work?
Prov. My son, eat thou honey, for it is good,  the droppings of the honeycomb, which are sweet to thy taste,
Prov. so the knowledge of wisdom is to thy soul. If thou have found it, then there shall be a reward,  thy hope shall not be cut off.
Prov. Lay not in wait, O wicked man, against the habitation of the righteous. Do not destroy his resting place.
Prov. For a righteous man falls seven times,  rises up again,  the wicked are overthrown by calamity.
Prov. Rejoice not when thine enemy falls,  let not thy heart be glad when he is overthrown,
Prov. lest Jehovah see it,  it displease him,  he turn away his wrath from him.
Prov. Fret not thyself because of evildoers, nor be thou envious at the wicked.
Prov. For there shall be no reward to the evil man. The lamp of the wicked shall be put out.
Prov. My son, fear thou Jehovah and the king,  do not associate with those who are given to change.
Prov. For their calamity shall rise suddenly,  the destruction from them both, who knows it?
Prov. These also are from the wise: To have respect of persons in judgment is not good.
Prov. He who says to a wicked man, Thou are righteous, peoples shall curse him, nations shall abhor him.
Prov. But to those who rebuke him shall be delight,  a good blessing shall come upon them.
Prov. He who gives a right answer kisses the lips.
Prov. Prepare thy work outside,  make it ready for thee in the field,  afterwards build thy house.
Prov. Be not a witness against thy neighbor without cause,  deceive not with thy lips.
Prov. Say not, I will do so to him as he has done to me; I will render to the man according to his work.
Prov. I went by the field of the sluggard,  by the vineyard of the man void of understanding.
Prov. And, lo, it was all grown over with thorns. The face of it was covered with nettles,  the stone wall of it was broken down.
Prov. Then I beheld,  considered well. I saw,  received instruction:
Prov. Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep,
Prov. so thy poverty shall come as a robber,  thy want as an armed man.
Prov. These also are proverbs of Solomon, which the men of Hezekiah king of Judah copied out.
Prov. It is the glory of God to conceal a thing,  the glory of kings is to search out a matter.
Prov. As the heavens for height,  the earth for depth, so the heart of kings is unsearchable.
Prov. Take away the dross from the silver,  there comes forth a vessel for the refiner.
Prov. Take away the wicked from before the king,  his throne shall be established in righteousness.
Prov. Put not thyself forward in the presence of the king,  stand not in the place of great men.
Prov. For it is better that it be said to thee, Come up here, than that thou should be put lower in the presence of the prince, whom thine eyes have seen.
Prov. Go not forth hastily to strive. What will thou do in the end of it when thy neighbor has put thee to shame?
Prov. Debate thy case with thy neighbor himself,  disclose not the secret of another,
Prov. lest he who hears it revile thee,  thine infamy turn not away.
Prov. A word fitly spoken is apples of gold in a network of silver.
Prov. An earring of gold,  an ornament of fine gold, is a wise reprover upon an obedient ear.
Prov. As the cold of snow in the time of harvest, is a faithful messenger to those who send him, for he refreshes the soul of his masters.
Prov. Clouds and wind without rain, is he who boasts himself of his gifts falsely.
Prov. By long-suffering a ruler is persuaded,  a soft tongue breaks the bone.
Prov. Have thou found honey? Eat as much as is sufficient for thee, lest thou be filled with it,  vomit it.
Prov. Let thy foot be seldom in thy neighbor's house, lest he be weary of thee,  hate thee.
Prov. A man who bears false witness against his neighbor is a maul,  a sword,  a sharp arrow.
Prov. Confidence in an unfaithful man in time of trouble is a broken tooth,  a foot out of joint.
Prov. As he who takes off a garment in cold weather,  vinegar upon soda, so is he who sings songs to a heavy heart.
Prov. If thine enemy is hungry, give him bread to eat,  if he is thirsty, give him water to drink.
Prov. For thou will heap coals of fire upon his head,  Jehovah will reward thee.
Prov. The north wind brings forth rain. So does a backbiting tongue, an angry countenance.
Prov. It is better to dwell in the corner of the housetop, than with a contentious woman in a wide house.
Prov. As cold waters to a thirsty soul, so is good news from a far country.
Prov. A troubled fountain,  a corrupted spring, is a righteous man who gives way before the wicked.
Prov. It is not good to eat much honey, so for men to search out their own glory is grievous.
Prov. He whose spirit is without restraint is a city that is broken down and without walls.
Prov. As snow in summer,  as rain in harvest, so honor is not seemly for a fool.
Prov. As the sparrow in her wandering, as the swallow in her flying, so the curse that is causeless does not alight.
Prov. A whip for the horse, a bridle for the donkey,  a rod for the back of fools.
Prov. Answer not a fool according to his folly, lest thou also be like to him.
Prov. Answer a fool according to his folly, lest he be wise in his own conceit.
Prov. He who sends a message by the hand of a fool cuts off the feet,  drinks injury.
Prov. The legs of a lame man hang loose. So is a proverb in the mouth of fools.
Prov. As he who binds a stone in a sling, so is he who gives honor to a fool.
Prov. As a thorn that goes up into the hand of a drunkard, so is a proverb in the mouth of fools.
Prov. As an archer who wounds all, so is he who hires a fool,  he who hires those who pass by.
Prov. As a dog who returns to his vomit, is a fool who repeats his folly.
Prov. See thou a man wise in his own conceit? There is more hope for a fool than of him.
Prov. The sluggard says, There is a lion in the way; a lion is in the streets.
Prov. The door turns upon its hinges, so does the sluggard upon his bed.
Prov. The sluggard buries his hand in the dish. It wearies him to bring it again to his mouth.
Prov. The sluggard is wiser in his own conceit than seven men who can render a reason.
Prov. He who passes by,  meddles with strife not his, is like he who takes a dog by the ears.
Prov. As a madman who casts firebrands, arrows,  death,
Prov. so is the man who deceives his neighbor,  says, Am I not in sport?
Prov. For lack of wood the fire goes out,  where there is no whisperer, contention ceases.
Prov. As coals are to hot embers,  wood to fire, so is a contentious man to inflame strife.
Prov. The words of a whisperer are as dainty morsels,  they go down into the innermost parts.
Prov. Fervent lips and a wicked heart are an earthen vessel overlaid with silver dross.
Prov. He who hates masquerades with his lips,  he lays up deceit within him.
Prov. When he speaks graciously, believe him not, for there are seven abominations in his heart.
Prov. Though his hatred cover itself with guile, his wickedness shall be openly shown before the assembly.
Prov. He who digs a pit shall fall in it,  he who rolls a stone, it shall return upon him.
Prov. A lying tongue hates those whom it has wounded,  a flattering mouth works ruin.
Prov. Boast not thyself of tomorrow, for thou know not what a day may bring forth.
Prov. Let another man praise thee,  not thine own mouth, a stranger,  not thine own lips.
Prov. A stone is heavy,  the sand weighty,  a fool's vexation is heavier than both.
Prov. Wrath is cruel,  anger is overwhelming,  who is able to stand before jealousy?
Prov. Better is open rebuke than love that is hidden.
Prov. Faithful are the wounds of a friend,  the kisses of an enemy are profuse.
Prov. The full soul loathes a honeycomb,  to the hungry soul every bitter thing is sweet.
Prov. As a bird that wanders from her nest, so is a man who wanders from his place.
Prov. Oil and perfume rejoice the heart, so too the sweetness of a man's friend by hearty counsel.
Prov. Forsake not thine own friend,  thy father's friend. And go not to thy brother's house in the day of thy calamity. Better is a neighbor nearby than a brother far off.
Prov. My son, be wise,  make my heart glad, that I may answer him who reproaches me.
Prov. A prudent man sees the evil,  hides himself. The simple pass on,  suffer for it.
Prov. Take his garment who is surety for a stranger,  hold him in pledge who is surety for a strange woman.
Prov. He who blesses his friend with a loud voice, rising early in the morning, it shall be considered a curse to him.
Prov. A continual dropping in a very rainy day,  a contentious woman are alike.
Prov. He who would restrain her restrains the wind,  his right hand encounters oil.
Prov. Iron sharpens iron, so a man sharpens the countenance of his friend.
Prov. He who keeps the fig tree shall eat the fruit of it,  he who regards his master shall be honored.
Prov. As in water face is to face, so the heart of a man is to a man.
Prov. Sheol and Abaddon are never satisfied,  the eyes of man are never satisfied.
Prov. The refining pot is for silver,  the furnace for gold,  a man is tried by his praise.
Prov. Though thou should pound a fool in a mortar with a pestle along with crushed grain, yet his foolishness will not depart from him.
Prov. Be thou diligent to know the state of thy flocks,  look well to thy herds.
Prov. For riches are not forever. And does the crown endure to all generations?
Prov. The hay is carried,  the tender grass shows itself,  the herbs of the mountains are gathered in.
Prov. The lambs are for thy clothing,  the goats are the cost of the field.
Prov. And then will be goats' milk enough for thy food; for the food of thy household,  maintenance for thy maidens.
Prov. A wicked man flees when no man pursues,  the righteous are bold as a lion.
Prov. For the transgression of a land many are the rulers of it. But by men of understanding and knowledge the state shall be prolonged.
Prov. A needy man who oppresses the poor is a sweeping rain which leaves no food.
Prov. Those who forsake the law praise the wicked,  such as keep the law contend with them.
Prov. Evil men do not understand justice,  those who seek Jehovah understand all things.
Prov. Better is the poor man who walks in his integrity, than he who is perverse in his ways, though he be rich.
Prov. He who keeps the law is a wise son,  he who is a companion of gluttons shames his father.
Prov. He who augments his substance by interest and increase, gathers it for him who has pity on the poor.
Prov. He who turns away his ear from hearing the law, even his prayer is an abomination.
Prov. He who causes the upright to go astray in an evil way, he shall fall himself into his own pit. But the perfect shall inherit good.
Prov. The rich man is wise in his own conceit,  a poor man who has understanding searches him out.
Prov. When the righteous triumph, there is great glory,  when the wicked rise, men hide themselves.
Prov. He who covers his transgressions shall not prosper,  he who confesses and forsakes them shall obtain mercy.
Prov. Happy is the man who fears always,  he who hardens his heart shall fall into mischief.
Prov. A roaring lion,  a ranging bear, is a wicked ruler over a poor people.
Prov. The ruler who lacks understanding is also a great oppressor,  he who hates covetousness shall prolong his days.
Prov. A man who is laden with the blood of any person shall flee to the pit. Let no man stay him.
Prov. He who walks uprightly shall be delivered,  he who is perverse in his ways shall fall at once.
Prov. He who tills his land shall have plenty of bread,  he who follows after vanity shall have poverty enough.
Prov. A faithful man shall abound with blessings,  he who makes haste to be rich shall not be unpunished.
Prov. To have respect of persons is not good, nor that a man should transgress for a piece of bread.
Prov. He who has an evil eye hastens after riches,  does not know that want shall come upon him.
Prov. He who rebukes a man shall afterward find more favor than he who flatters with the tongue.
Prov. He who robs his father or his mother,  says, It is no transgression, the same is the companion of a destroyer.
Prov. He who is of a greedy spirit stirs up strife,  he who puts his trust in Jehovah shall be made fat.
Prov. He who trusts in his own heart is a fool,  he who walks wisely, he shall be delivered.
Prov. He who gives to the poor shall not lack,  he who hides his eyes shall have many a curse.
Prov. When the wicked rise, men hide themselves,  when they perish, the righteous increase.
Prov. He who, being often reproved, hardens his neck shall suddenly be destroyed,  that without remedy.
Prov. When the righteous are increased, the people rejoice,  when a wicked man bears rule, the people sigh.
Prov. He who loves wisdom delights his father,  he who keeps company with harlots wastes his substance.
Prov. By justice the king establishes the land,  he who exacts gifts overthrows it.
Prov. A man who flatters his neighbor spreads a net for his steps.
Prov. In the transgression of an evil man there is a snare,  a righteous man sings and rejoices.
Prov. A righteous man takes knowledge of the cause of the poor. A wicked man has no such understanding to know.
Prov. Scoffers set a city in a flame,  wise men turn away wrath.
Prov. If a wise man has a controversy with a foolish man, whether he be angry or laugh, there will be no rest.
Prov. Bloodthirsty men hate him who is perfect,  the upright seek his soul.
Prov. A fool utters all his anger,  a wise man keeps it back and calms it.
Prov. If a ruler hearkens to falsehood, all his servants are wicked.
Prov. The poor man and the oppressor meet together. Jehovah enlightens the eyes of them both.
Prov. The king who faithfully judges the poor, his throne shall be established forever.
Prov. The rod and reproof give wisdom,  a child left to himself causes shame to his mother.
Prov. When the wicked are increased, transgression increases,  the righteous shall look upon their fall.
Prov. Correct thy son,  he will give thee rest, yea, he will give delight to thy soul.
Prov. Where there is no vision, the people cast off restraint,  he who keeps the law, happy is he.
Prov. A servant will not be corrected by words, for though he understands, he will not give heed.
Prov. See thou a man who is hasty in his words? There is more hope for a fool than for him.
Prov. He who brings up his servant gently from childhood shall have him become a son at the last.
Prov. An angry man stirs up strife,  a wrathful man abounds in transgression.
Prov. A man's pride shall bring him low,  he who is of a lowly spirit shall obtain honor.
Prov. He who is partner with a thief hates his own soul; he hears the adjuration and utters nothing.
Prov. The fear of man brings a snare,  he who puts his trust in Jehovah shall be safe.
Prov. Many seek the ruler's favor,  a man's justice is from Jehovah.
Prov. An unjust man is an abomination to the righteous,  he who is upright in the way is an abomination to a wicked man.
Prov. The words of Agur the son of Jakeh, the oracle. The man says to Ithiel, to Ithiel and Ucal:
Prov. Surely I am more brutish than any man,  have not the understanding of a man,
Prov. and I have not learned wisdom, nor have I the knowledge of the Holy.
Prov. Who has ascended up into heaven,  descended? Who has gathered the wind in his fists? Who has bound the waters in his garment? Who has established all the ends of the earth? What is his name,  what is his son's name, if thou know?
Prov. Every word of God is tried. He is a shield to those who take refuge in him.
Prov. Add thou not to his words, lest he reprove thee,  thou be found a liar.
Prov. Two things I have asked of thee, deny me not before I die:
Prov. Remove far from me falsehood and lies. Give me neither poverty nor riches; feed me with the food that is needful for me,
Prov. lest I be full,  deny thee,  say, Who is Jehovah? or lest I be poor,  steal,  use the name of my God profanely.
Prov. Slander not a servant to his master, lest he curse thee,  thou be held guilty.
Prov. There is a generation who curses their father,  does not bless their mother.
Prov. There is a generation who are pure in their own eyes,  yet are not washed from their filthiness.
Prov. There is a generation, O how lofty are their eyes,  their eyelids are lifted up.
Prov. There is a generation whose teeth are swords,  their jaw teeth, knives, to devour the poor from off the earth,  the needy from among men.
Prov. The leach has two daughters, crying, Give, give. There are three things that are never satisfied, yea, four that do not say, Enough:
Prov. Sheol,  the barren womb, the earth that is not satisfied with water,  the fire that does not say, Enough.
Prov. The eye that mocks at his father,  despises to obey his mother, the ravens of the valley shall pick it out,  the young eagles shall eat it.
Prov. There are three things which are too wonderful for me, yea, four which I know not:
Prov. The way of an eagle in the air, the way of a serpent upon a rock, the way of a ship in the midst of the sea,  the way of a man with a maiden.
Prov. So is the way of an adulterous woman: She eats,  wipes her mouth,  says, I have done no iniquity.
Prov. For three things the earth trembles,  for four, which it cannot bear:
Prov. For a servant when he is king,  a fool when he is filled with food,
Prov. for a hateful woman when she is married,  a handmaid that is heir to her mistress.
Prov. There are four things which are little upon the earth,  they are exceedingly wise:
Prov. The ants are a people not strong, yet they prepare their food in the summer,
Prov. the conies are but a feeble folk, yet they make their houses in the rocks,
Prov. the locusts have no king, yet they go forth all of them by bands,
Prov. the lizard takes hold with her hands, yet she is in kings' palaces.
Prov. There are three things which are stately in their march, yea, four which are stately in going:
Prov. The lion, which is mightiest among beasts,  turns not away from any,
Prov. the greyhound, also the he-goat,  the king against whom there is no rising up.
Prov. If thou have done foolishly in lifting up thyself, or if thou have thought evil, lay thy hand upon thy mouth.
Prov. For the churning of milk brings forth butter,  the wringing of the nose brings forth blood, so the forcing of wrath brings forth strife.
Prov. The words of king Lemuel, the oracle which his mother taught him.
Prov. What, my son? And what, O son of my womb? And what, O son of my vows?
Prov. Give not thy strength to women, nor thy ways to that which destroys kings.
Prov. It is not for kings, O Lemuel, it is not for kings to drink wine, nor for rulers to say, Where is strong drink?
Prov. Lest they drink,  forget the law,  pervert the justice due to any who is afflicted.
Prov. Give strong drink to him who is ready to perish,  wine to the bitter in soul.
Prov. Let him drink,  forget his need,  remember his misery no more.
Prov. Open thy mouth for the mute, in the cause of all such as are left desolate.
Prov. Open thy mouth, judge righteously,  minister justice to the poor and needy.
Prov. A worthy woman who can find? For her price is far above rubies.
Prov. The heart of her husband trusts in her,  he shall have no lack of gain.
Prov. She does him good and not evil all the days of her life.
Prov. She seeks wool and flax,  works willingly with her hands.
Prov. She is like the merchant ships: she brings her bread from afar.
Prov. She also rises while it is yet night,  gives food to her household,  their task to her maidens.
Prov. She considers a field,  buys it. With the fruit of her hands she plants a vineyard.
Prov. She girds her loins with strength,  makes strong her arms.
Prov. She perceives that her merchandise is profitable. Her lamp does not go out by night.
Prov. She lays her hands to the distaff,  her hands hold the spindle.
Prov. She stretches out her hand to the poor, yea, she reaches forth her hands to the needy.
Prov. She is not afraid of the snow for her household, for all her household are clothed with scarlet.
Prov. She makes for herself carpets of tapestry. Her clothing is fine linen and purple.
Prov. Her husband is known in the gates when he sits among the elders of the land.
Prov. She makes linen garments and sells them,  delivers girdles to the merchant.
Prov. Strength and dignity are her clothing,  she laughs at the time to come.
Prov. She opens her mouth with wisdom,  the law of kindness is on her tongue.
Prov. She looks well to the ways of her household,  does not eat the bread of idleness.
Prov. Her sons rise up,  call her blessed. Her husband also,  he praises her.
Prov. Many daughters have done worthily,  thou excel them all.
Prov. Charm is deceitful,  beauty is vain,  a woman who fears Jehovah, she shall be praised.
Prov. Give her of the fruit of her hands,  let her works praise her in the gates.
Ecclesiastes
Eccl. The words of the Preacher, the son of David, king in Jerusalem.
Eccl. Vanity of vanities, says the Preacher, vanity of vanities, all is vanity.
Eccl. What profit has man from all his labor in which he labors under the sun?
Eccl. One generation goes,  another generation comes,  the earth abides forever.
Eccl. The sun also arises,  the sun goes down and hastens to its place where it arises.
Eccl. The wind goes toward the south,  turns around to the north. It turns around continually in its course,  the wind returns again to its circuits.
Eccl. All the rivers run into the sea, yet the sea is not full. To the place from where the rivers come, there they go again.
Eccl. All things are full of weariness, man cannot utter it. The eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear filled with hearing.
Eccl. That which has been is that which shall be,  that which has been done is that which shall be done. And there is no new thing under the sun.
Eccl. Is there a thing of which it may be said, See, this is new? It has been long ago, in the ages which were before us.
Eccl. There is no remembrance of the former things, nor shall there be any remembrance of the latter that are to come, among those who shall come after.
Eccl. I the Preacher was king over Israel in Jerusalem.
Eccl. And I applied my heart to seek and to search out by wisdom concerning all that is done under heaven. It is a great tribulation that God has given to the sons of men to be exercised therewith.
Eccl. I have seen all the works that are done under the sun, , behold, all is vanity and a striving after wind.
Eccl. That which is crooked cannot be made straight,  that which is wanting cannot be numbered.
Eccl. I communed with my own heart, saying, Lo, I have gotten for me great wisdom above all who were before me in Jerusalem. Yea, my heart has had great experience of wisdom and knowledge.
Eccl. And I applied my heart to know wisdom,  to know madness and folly. I perceived that this also was a striving after wind.
Eccl. For in much wisdom is much grief,  he who increases knowledge increases sorrow.
Eccl. I said in my heart, Come now, I will prove thee with mirth, therefore enjoy pleasure. And, behold, this also was vanity.
Eccl. I said of laughter, It is mad,  of mirth, What does it do?
Eccl. I searched in my heart how to cheer my flesh with wine (my heart yet guiding me with wisdom),  how to lay hold on folly, till I might see what it was good for the sons of men that they should do under heaven all the days of their life.
Eccl. I made for me great works. I built for me houses. I planted for me vineyards.
Eccl. I made for me gardens and parks,  I planted trees in them of all kinds of fruit.
Eccl. I made for me pools of water, to water from there the forest where trees were reared.
Eccl. I bought men-servants and maid-servants,  had servants born in my house. I also had great possessions of herds and flocks, above all who were before me in Jerusalem.
Eccl. I also gathered for me silver and gold,  the treasure of kings and of the provinces. I got for me men-singers and women-singers,  the luxuries of the sons of men,  a wife and wives.
Eccl. So I was great,  increased more than all who were before me in Jerusalem. Also my wisdom remained with me.
Eccl. And whatever my eyes desired I kept not from them. I did not withhold my heart from any joy. For my heart rejoiced because of all my labor,  this was my portion from all my labor.
Eccl. Then I looked on all the works that my hands had wrought,  on the labor that I had labored to do, , behold, all was vanity and a striving after wind,  there was no profit under the sun.
Eccl. And I turned myself to behold wisdom and madness and folly. For what can the man do who comes after the king? Even that which has been done long ago.
Eccl. Then I saw that wisdom excels folly as far as light excels darkness.
Eccl. The wise man's eyes are in his head,  the fool walks in darkness. And yet I perceived that one event happens to them all.
Eccl. Then I said in my heart, As it happens to the fool, so it will happen even to me,  why then was I more wise? Then I said in my heart that this also is vanity.
Eccl. For of the wise man, even as of the fool, there is no remembrance forever, seeing that in the days to come all will have been long forgotten. And how the wise man dies even as the fool!
Eccl. So I hated life, because the work that is wrought under the sun was grievous to me. For all is vanity and a striving after wind.
Eccl. And I hated all my labor in which I labored under the sun, seeing that I must leave it to the man who shall be after me.
Eccl. And who knows whether he will be a wise man or a fool? Yet he will have rule over all my labor in which I have labored,  in which I have shown myself wise under the sun. This also is vanity.
Eccl. Therefore I turned about to cause my heart to despair concerning all the labor in which I had labored under the sun.
Eccl. For there is a man whose labor is with wisdom,  with knowledge,  with skillfulness, yet he shall leave it to a man who has not labored in it for his portion. This also is vanity and a great evil.
Eccl. For what has a man of all his labor,  of the striving of his heart in which he labors under the sun?
Eccl. For all his days are but sorrows,  his travail is grief, yea, even in the night his heart takes no rest. This also is vanity.
Eccl. There is nothing better for a man than that he should eat and drink,  make his soul enjoy good in his labor. This also I saw, that it is from the hand of God.
Eccl. For who can eat, or who can have enjoyment, without him?
Eccl. For to the man who pleases him God gives wisdom and knowledge and joy,  to the sinner he gives travail, to gather and to heap up, that he may give to him who pleases God. This also is vanity and a striving after wind.
Eccl. For everything there is a season,  a time for every purpose under heaven:
Eccl. a time to be born,  a time to die, a time to plant,  a time to pluck up that which is planted,
Eccl. a time to kill,  a time to heal, a time to break down,  a time to build up,
Eccl. a time to weep,  a time to laugh, a time to mourn,  a time to dance,
Eccl. a time to cast away stones,  a time to gather stones together, a time to embrace,  a time to refrain from embracing,
Eccl. a time to seek,  a time to lose, a time to keep,  a time to cast away,
Eccl. a time to tear,  a time to sew, a time to keep silence,  a time to speak,
Eccl. a time to love,  a time to hate, a time for war,  a time for peace.
Eccl. What profit has he who works in that in which he labors?
Eccl. I have seen the travail which God has given to the sons of men to be employed therewith.
Eccl. He has made everything beautiful in its time. Also he has set eternity in their heart, yet so that man cannot find out the work that God has done from the beginning even to the end.
Eccl. I know that there is nothing better for them, than to rejoice,  to do good as long as they live.
Eccl. And also that every man should eat and drink,  enjoy good in all his labor. It is the gift of God.
Eccl. I know that, whatever God does, it shall be forever. Nothing can be put to it, nor anything taken from it. And God has done it that men should fear before him.
Eccl. That which is, has been long ago,  that which is to be, has long ago been. And God seeks again that which has passed away.
Eccl. And moreover I saw under the sun, in the place of justice, that wickedness was there,  in the place of righteousness, that wickedness was there.
Eccl. I said in my heart, God will judge the righteous man and the wicked man, for there is a time there for every purpose and for every work.
Eccl. I said in my heart, It is because of the sons of men, that God may prove them,  that they may see that they themselves are beasts.
Eccl. For that which befalls the sons of men befalls beasts, even one thing befalls them; as the one dies, so dies the other. Yea, they all have one breath,  man has no preeminence above the beasts; for all is vanity.
Eccl. All go to one place. All are of the dust,  all turn to dust again.
Eccl. Who knows the spirit of man, whether it goes upward,  the spirit of the beast, whether it goes downward to the earth?
Eccl. Therefore I saw that there is nothing better, than that a man should rejoice in his works, for that is his portion. For who shall bring him back to see what shall be after him?
Eccl. Then I returned and saw all the oppressions that are done under the sun. And, behold, the tears of such as were oppressed,  they had no comforter. And on the side of their oppressors there was power,  they had no comforter.
Eccl. Therefore I praised the dead who have long been dead more than the living who are yet alive.
Eccl. Yea, better than them both is him who has not yet been, who has not seen the evil work that is done under the sun.
Eccl. Then I saw all labor and every skilful work, that for this a man is envied by his neighbor. This also is vanity and a striving after wind.
Eccl. The fool folds his hands together,  eats his own flesh.
Eccl. Better is a handful, with quietness, than two handfuls with labor and striving after wind.
Eccl. Then I returned and saw vanity under the sun.
Eccl. There is one man who is alone,  he has not a second, yea, he has neither son nor brother. Yet there is no end of all his labor, nor are his eyes satisfied with riches. For whom then, he says, do I labor,  deprive my soul of good? This also is vanity, yea, it is a great travail.
Eccl. Two are better than one, because they have a good reward for their labor.
Eccl. For if they fall, the one will lift up his fellow,  woe to him who is alone when he falls,  has not another to lift him up.
Eccl. Again, if two lie together, then they have warmth,  how can one be warm alone?
Eccl. And if a man prevails against him who is alone, two shall withstand him. And a threefold cord is not quickly broken.
Eccl. Better is a poor and wise youth than an old and foolish king who does not know how to receive admonition any more.
Eccl. For he came forth out of prison to be king, yea, even in his kingdom he was born poor.
Eccl. I saw all the living who walk under the sun, that they were with the youth, the second, who stood up in his stead.
Eccl. There was no end of all the people, even of all those over whom he was. Yet those who come after shall not rejoice in him. Surely this also is vanity and a striving after wind.
Eccl. Keep thy foot when thou go to the house of God, for to draw near to hear is better than to give the sacrifice of fools. For they know not that they do evil.
Eccl. Be not rash with thy mouth,  let not thy heart be hasty to utter anything before God. For God is in heaven,  thou upon earth. Therefore let thy words be few.
Eccl. For a dream comes with a multitude of business,  a fool's voice with a multitude of words.
Eccl. When thou vow a vow to God, defer not to pay it, for he has no pleasure in fools. Pay that which thou vow.
Eccl. Better is it that thou should not vow, than that thou should vow and not pay.
Eccl. Do not allow thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin, nor say thou before the agent, that is was an error. Why should God be angry at thy voice,  destroy the work of thy hands?
Eccl. For in the multitude of dreams there are vanities,  in many words. But fear thou God.
Eccl. If thou see the oppression of a poor man,  the violent wresting of justice and righteousness in a province, marvel not at the matter. For a man higher than the high is observing,  there are higher men than they.
Eccl. Moreover the abundance of the land is for all. The king himself is served by the field.
Eccl. He who loves silver shall not be satisfied with silver, nor he who loves abundance, with increase. This also is vanity.
Eccl. When goods increase, they are increased who eat them. And what advantage is there to the owner of it, except the beholding of them with his eyes?
Eccl. The sleep of a laboring man is sweet, whether he eats little or much,  the fullness of the rich will not allow him to sleep.
Eccl. There is a grievous evil which I have seen under the sun: Riches were kept by the owner of it to his hurt.
Eccl. And those riches perish in a bad venture. And if he has begotten a son, there is nothing in his hand.
Eccl. As he came forth from his mother's womb, naked shall he go again as he came,  shall take nothing for his labor, which he may carry away in his hand.
Eccl. And this also is a grievous evil, that in all points as he came, so shall he go. And what profit has he that he labored for the wind?
Eccl. All his days also he eats in gloom,  he is greatly troubled,  has depression and anger.
Eccl. Behold, that which I have seen to be good and to be fitting is for a man to eat and to drink,  to enjoy good in all his labor in which he labors under the sun all the days of his life which God has given him, for this is his portion.
Eccl. Every man also to whom God has given riches and wealth,  has given him power to eat of it,  to take his portion,  to rejoice in his labor-this is the gift of God.
Eccl. For he shall not much remember the days of his life, because God answers him in the joy of his heart.
Eccl. There is an evil which I have seen under the sun,  it is heavy upon men:
Eccl. A man to whom God gives riches, wealth,  honor, so that he lacks nothing for his soul of all that he desires, yet God does not give him power to eat of it,  an alien eats it. This is vanity,  it is an evil disease.
Eccl. If a man begets a hundred sons,  lives many years so that the days of his years are many,  his soul is not filled with good,  moreover he has no burial, I say, that an untimely birth is better than he.
Eccl. For it comes in vanity,  departs in darkness,  the name of it is covered with darkness.
Eccl. Moreover it has not seen the sun nor known it, this one has rest rather than the other.
Eccl. Yea, though he lives a thousand years twice told,  yet enjoys no good, do not all go to one place?
Eccl. All the labor of man is for his mouth,  yet the appetite is not filled.
Eccl. For what advantage has the wise man more than the fool? What has the poor man, who knows how to walk before the living?
Eccl. Better is the sight of the eyes than the wandering of the desire. This also is vanity and a striving after wind.
Eccl. Whatever has been, the name of it was given long ago,  it is know what man is. Neither can he contend with him who is mightier than he.
Eccl. Since there are many things that increase vanity, what is man the better?
Eccl. For who knows what is good for man in life, all the days of his vain life which he spends as a shadow? For who can tell a man what shall be after him under the sun?
Eccl. A good name is better than precious oil,  the day of death, than the day of birth.
Eccl. It is better to go to the house of mourning than to go to the house of feasting. For that is the end of all men,  the living will lay it to his heart.
Eccl. Sorrow is better than laughter, for by the sadness of the countenance the heart is made glad.
Eccl. The heart of the wise is in the house of mourning,  the heart of fools is in the house of mirth.
Eccl. It is better to hear the rebuke of a wise man, than for a man to hear the song of fools.
Eccl. For as the crackling of thorns under a pot, so is the laughter of the fool. This also is vanity.
Eccl. Surely oppression makes the wise man foolish,  a bribe destroys the understanding.
Eccl. Better is the end of a thing than the beginning of it. The patient in spirit is better than the proud in spirit.
Eccl. Be not hasty in thy spirit to be angry, for anger rests in the bosom of fools.
Eccl. Say thou not, What is the cause that the former days were better than these? For thou do not inquire wisely concerning this.
Eccl. Wisdom is as good as an inheritance, yea, it is more excellent for those who see the sun.
Eccl. For wisdom is a defense, even as money is a defense. But the excellency of knowledge is, that wisdom preserves the life of him who has it.
Eccl. Consider the work of God. For who can make that straight, which he has made crooked?
Eccl. In the day of prosperity be joyful,  in the day of adversity consider. Yea, God has made the one side by side with the other, to the end that man should not find out anything after him.
Eccl. All this I have seen in my days of vanity. There is a righteous man who perishes in his righteousness,  there is a wicked man who prolongs his life in his evil-doing.
Eccl. Be not over-righteous, nor show thyself too wise. Why should thou destroy thyself?
Eccl. Do not much wrong, nor be thou a fool. Why should thou die before thy time?
Eccl. It is good that thou should take hold of this, yea, also from that withdraw not thy hand. For he who fears God shall come forth from them all.
Eccl. Wisdom is a strength to the wise man more than ten rulers that are in a city.
Eccl. Surely there is not a righteous man upon earth that does good,  sins not.
Eccl. Also do not take heed to all words that are spoken, lest thou hear thy servant curse thee.
Eccl. For many times also thine own heart knows that thou thyself likewise have cursed others.
Eccl. All this I have proved in wisdom. I said, I will be wise,  it was far from me.
Eccl. That which is, is far off and exceedingly deep. Who can find it out?
Eccl. I turned about,  my heart was set to know and to search out,  to seek wisdom and the reason of things,  to know that wickedness is folly,  that foolishness is madness.
Eccl. And I find more bitter than death the woman whose heart is snares and nets,  whose hands are chains. He who pleases God shall escape from her,  the sinner shall be taken by her.
Eccl. Behold, I have found this, says the Preacher, laying one thing to another, to find out the account,
Eccl. which my soul still seeks,  I have not found: among a thousand I have found one man,  among all those I have not found a woman.
Eccl. Behold, this only I have found: That God made man upright,  they have sought out many contrivances.
Eccl. Who is as the wise man? And who knows the interpretation of a thing? A man's wisdom makes his face to shine,  the hardness of his face is changed.
Eccl. I say, Keep the king's command,  that because of the oath of God.
Eccl. Be not hasty to go out of his presence. Persist not in an evil matter, for he does whatever pleases him.
Eccl. For the king's word has power,  who may say to him, What are thou doing?
Eccl. He who keeps a commandment shall know no evil thing. And a wise man's heart discerns the time and decision.
Eccl. For to every purpose there is a time and decision, although the distress of man is great upon him.
Eccl. For he knows not that which shall be, for who can tell him how it shall be?
Eccl. There is no man who has power over the spirit to retain the spirit, nor has he power over the day of death. And there is no discharge in war. Neither shall wickedness deliver him who is given to it.
Eccl. All this I have seen,  applied my heart to every work that is done under the sun. There is a time in which one man has power over another to his hurt.
Eccl. So I saw the wicked buried, who had come and gone from the place of the holy,  they were praised in the city where they had so done. This also is vanity.
Eccl. Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil.
Eccl. Though a sinner does evil a hundred times,  prolongs his days, yet surely I know that it shall be well with those who fear God, who fear before him.
Eccl. But it shall not be well with a wicked man, neither shall he prolong his days, which are as a shadow, because he did not fear before God.
Eccl. There is a vanity which is done upon the earth, that there are righteous men to whom it happens according to the work of the wicked, again, there are wicked men to whom it happens according to the work of the righteous. I said that this also is vanity.
Eccl. Then I commended joy, because a man has no better thing under the sun, than to eat,  to drink,  to be cheerful. For that shall abide with him in his labor all the days of his life which God has given him under the sun.
Eccl. When I applied my heart to know wisdom,  to see the business that is done upon the earth (for also there is he who sees sleep with his eyes neither day nor night),
Eccl. then I beheld all the work of God, that man cannot find out the work that is done under the sun. Because however much a man labors to seek it out, yet he shall not find it. Yea moreover, though a wise man thinks to know it, yet he shall not be able to find it.
Eccl. For all this I laid to my heart, even to explore all this, that the righteous,  the wise,  their works, are in the hand of God. No man understands, either love or hatred. All is before them.
Eccl. All things come alike to all. There is one event to the righteous man and to the wicked man, to the good man,  to the clean man,  to the unclean man, to him who sacrifices and to him who does not sacrifice, as is the good man, so is the sinner,  he who swears, as he who fears an oath.
Eccl. This is an evil in all that is done under the sun, that there is one event to all. Yea also, the heart of the sons of men is full of evil,  madness is in their heart while they live,  after that they go to the dead.
Eccl. Because to him who is joined with all the living there is hope, for a living dog is better than a dead lion.
Eccl. For the living know that they shall die,  the dead know not anything, nor have they any more a reward, for the memory of them is forgotten.
Eccl. As well their love, as their hatred and their envy, has perished long ago, nor have they any more a portion forever in anything that is done under the sun.
Eccl. Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy,  drink thy wine with a merry heart, for God has already accepted thy works.
Eccl. Let thy garments be always white,  let not thy head lack oil.
Eccl. Live joyfully with the wife whom thou love all the days of thy life of vanity, which he has given thee under the sun, all thy days of vanity. For that is thy portion in life,  in thy labor in which thou labor under the sun.
Eccl. Whatever thy hand finds to do, do with thy might, for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in Sheol, where thou go.
Eccl. I returned,  saw under the sun, that the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, neither yet bread to the wise, nor yet riches to men of understanding, nor yet favor to men of skill,  time and chance happens to them all.
Eccl. For man also does not know his time. As the fishes that are taken in an evil net,  as the birds that are caught in the snare, even so are the sons of men snared in an evil time when it falls suddenly upon them.
Eccl. I have also seen wisdom under the sun this way,  it seemed great to me:
Eccl. There was a little city,  few men within it. And there came a great king against it,  besieged it,  built great bulwarks against it.
Eccl. Now there was found in it a poor wise man. And he by his wisdom delivered the city, yet no man remembered that same poor man.
Eccl. Then I said, Wisdom is better than strength. Nevertheless the poor man's wisdom is despised,  his words are not heard.
Eccl. The words of the wise heard in quiet are better than the cry of him who rules among fools.
Eccl. Wisdom is better than weapons of war,  one sinner destroys much good.
Eccl. Dead flies cause the oil of the perfumer to send forth an evil odor, so a little folly outweighs wisdom and honor.
Eccl. A wise man's heart is at his right hand,  a fool's heart at his left.
Eccl. Yea also, when the fool walks by the way, his understanding fails him,  he says to everyone that he is a fool.
Eccl. If the spirit of the ruler rises up against thee, leave not thy place, for deference allays great offenses.
Eccl. There is an evil which I have seen under the sun, as it were an error which proceeds from the ruler:
Eccl. Folly is set in great dignity,  the rich sit in a low place.
Eccl. I have seen servants upon horses,  rulers walking like servants upon the earth.
Eccl. He who digs a pit shall fall into it,  he who breaks through a wall, a serpent shall bite him.
Eccl. He who hews out stones shall be hurt therewith,  he who splits wood is endangered thereby.
Eccl. If the iron be blunt,  he does not whet the edge, then he must increase strength. But wisdom is advantageous to make right.
Eccl. If the serpent bites before it is charmed, then is there no advantage in the charmer.
Eccl. The words of a wise man's mouth are gracious,  the lips of a fool will swallow himself up.
Eccl. The beginning of the words of his mouth is foolishness,  the end of his talk is mischievous madness.
Eccl. A fool also multiplies words; yet man knows not what shall be,  that which shall be after him, who can tell him?
Eccl. The labor of fools wearies every one of them, for he knows not how to go to the city.
Eccl. Woe to thee, O land, when thy king is a child,  thy rulers feast in the morning!
Eccl. Happy are thou, O land, when thy king is the son of noble men,  thy rulers feast in due season, for strength,  not for drunkenness!
Eccl. By slothfulness the roof sinks in,  through idleness of the hands the house leaks.
Eccl. A feast is made for laughter,  wine makes glad the life,  money answers all things.
Eccl. Revile not the king, no, not in thy thought,  revile not the rich in thy bedchamber. For a bird of the heavens shall carry the voice,  that which has wings shall tell the matter.
Eccl. Cast thy bread upon the waters, for thou shall find it after many days.
Eccl. Give a portion to seven, yea, even to eight, for thou know not what evil shall be upon the earth.
Eccl. If the clouds are full of rain, they empty themselves upon the earth,  if a tree falls toward the south, or toward the north, in the place where the tree falls, there shall it be.
Eccl. He who observes the wind shall not sow,  he who regards the clouds shall not reap.
Eccl. As thou know not what is the way of the wind, nor how the bones grow in the womb of her who is with child, even so thou know not the work of God who does all.
Eccl. In the morning sow thy seed,  in the evening withhold not thy hand, for thou know not which shall prosper, whether this or that, or whether they both shall be alike good.
Eccl. Truly the light is sweet,  a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to behold the sun.
Eccl. Yea, if a man lives many years, let him rejoice in them all. But let him remember the days of darkness, for they shall be many. All that comes is vanity.
Eccl. Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth,  let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth,  walk in the ways of thy heart,  in the sight of thine eyes. But know thou, that for all these things God will bring thee into judgment.
Eccl. Therefore remove sorrow from thy heart,  put away evil from thy flesh, for youth and the dawn of life are vanity.
Eccl. Remember also thy Creator in the days of thy youth, before the evil days come,  the years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them,
Eccl. before the sun,  the light,  the moon,  the stars, are darkened,  the clouds return after the rain,
Eccl. in the day when the keepers of the house shall tremble,  the strong men shall bow themselves,  the grinders cease because they are few,  those who look out of the windows shall be darkened,
Eccl. and the doors shall be shut in the street, when the sound of the grinding is low,  he shall rise up at the voice of a bird,  all the daughters of music shall be brought low,
Eccl. yea, they shall be afraid of height,  terrors shall be in the way,  the almond tree shall blossom,  the grasshopper shall be a burden,  desire shall fail, because man goes to his everlasting home,  the mourners go about the streets,
Eccl. before the silver cord is loosed, or the golden bowl is broken, or the pitcher is broken at the fountain, or the wheel broken at the cistern,
Eccl. and the dust returns to the earth as it was,  the spirit returns to God who gave it.
Eccl. Vanity of vanities, says the Preacher, all is vanity.
Eccl. And further, because the Preacher was wise, he still taught the people knowledge. Yea, he pondered,  sought out,  set in order many proverbs.
Eccl. The Preacher sought to find out acceptable words,  that which was written uprightly-words of truth.
Eccl. The words of the wise are as goads,  as nails fastened by the masters of assemblies. They have been given from one shepherd.
Eccl. And furthermore, my son, be admonished: of making many books there is no end,  much study is a weariness of the flesh.
Eccl. This is the end of the matter, all has been heard: Fear God,  keep his commandments, for this is the whole of man.
Eccl. For God will bring every work into judgment, with every hidden thing, whether good or evil.
Song of Solomon
Song. The Song of songs, which is Solomon's.
Song. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth, for thy love is better than wine.
Song. Thine oils have a good fragrance. Thy name is oil poured forth. Therefore the virgins love thee.
Song. Draw me, we will run after thee. The king has brought me into his chambers. We will be glad and rejoice in thee. We will make mention of thy love more than of wine. Rightly do they love thee.
Song. I am black,  comely, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, as the tents of Kedar, as the curtains of Solomon.
Song. Look not upon me, because I am swarthy, because the sun has scorched me. My mother's sons were incensed against me. They made me keeper of the vineyards,  my own vineyard I have not kept.
Song. Tell me, O thou whom my soul loves, where thou feed thy flock, where thou make it to rest at noon. For why should I be as she who is veiled beside the flocks of thy companions?
Song. If thou know not, O thou fairest among women, go thy way forth by the footsteps of the flock,  feed thy kids beside the shepherds' tents.
Song. I have compared thee, O my love, to a steed in Pharaoh's chariots.
Song. Thy cheeks are comely with plaits of hair, thy neck with strings of jewels.
Song. We will make thee plaits of gold with studs of silver.
Song. While the king sat at his table, my spikenard sent forth its fragrance.
Song. My beloved is to me a bundle of myrrh that lies between my breasts.
Song. My beloved is to me a cluster of henna-flowers in the vineyards of En-gedi.
Song. Behold, thou are fair, my love, behold thou are fair. Thine eyes are doves.
Song. Behold, thou are fair, my beloved, yea, pleasant. Also our couch is green.
Song. The beams of our house are cedars, our rafters are firs.
Song. I am a rose of Sharon. A lily of the valleys.
Song. As a lily among thorns, So is my love among the daughters.
Song. As the apple tree among the trees of the wood, so is my beloved among the sons. I sat down under his shadow with great delight,  his fruit was sweet to my taste.
Song. He brought me to the banquet house,  his banner over me was love.
Song. Sustain ye me with raisins, refresh me with apples, for I am sick from love.
Song. His left hand is under my head,  his right hand embraces me.
Song. I adjure you, O daughters of Jerusalem, by the roes, or by the hinds of the field, that ye stir not up, nor awake love, until it please.
Song. The voice of my beloved! Behold, he comes, leaping upon the mountains, skipping upon the hills.
Song. My beloved is like a roe or a young hart. Behold, he stands behind our wall. He looks in at the windows. He glances through the lattice.
Song. My beloved spoke,  said to me, Rise up, my love, my fair one,  come away.
Song. For, lo, the winter is past. The rain is over and gone.
Song. The flowers appear on the earth. The time of the singing has come,  the voice of the turtledove is heard in our land.
Song. The fig tree ripens her green figs,  the vines are in blossom. They give forth their fragrance. Arise, my love, my fair one,  come away.
Song. O my dove, who are in the clefts of the rock, in the covert of the steep place, let me see thy countenance; let me hear thy voice. For sweet is thy voice,  thy countenance is comely.
Song. Take us the foxes, the little foxes, that spoil the vineyards. For our vineyards are in blossom.
Song. My beloved is mine,  I am his. He feeds among the lilies.
Song. Until the day be cool,  the shadows flee away, turn, my beloved,  be thou like a roe or a young hart upon the mountains of Bether.
Song. By night on my bed I sought him whom my soul loves. I sought him,  I did not find him.
Song. I said, I will rise now,  go around the city. In the streets and in the broad ways I will seek him whom my soul loves. I sought him,  I did not find him.
Song. The watchmen who go about the city found me. I said, Did ye see him whom my soul loves?
Song. It was but a little that I passed from them when I found him whom my soul loves. I held him,  would not let him go until I had brought him into my mother's house,  into the chamber of her who conceived me.
Song. I adjure you, O daughters of Jerusalem, by the roes, or by the hinds of the field, that ye stir not up, nor awake love, until it please.
Song. Who is this who comes up from the wilderness like pillars of smoke, perfumed with myrrh and frankincense, with all powders of the merchant?
Song. Behold, it is the litter of Solomon. Sixty mighty men are around it, of the mighty men of Israel.
Song. They all handle the sword,  are expert in war. Every man has his sword upon his thigh, because of fear in the night.
Song. King Solomon made himself a palanquin of the wood of Lebanon.
Song. He made the pillars thereof of silver, the bottom thereof of gold, the seat thereof of purple, the midst thereof being paved with love, from the daughters of Jerusalem.
Song. Go forth, O ye daughters of Zion,  behold king Solomon with the crown with which his mother has crowned him in the day of his espousals,  in the day of the gladness of his heart.
Song. Behold, thou are fair, my love, behold, thou are fair. Thine eyes are doves behind thy veil. Thy hair is as a flock of goats that lie along the side of mount Gilead.
Song. Thy teeth are like a flock of ewes that are newly shorn, which have come up from the washing, of which every one has twins,  none is bereaved among them.
Song. Thy lips are like a thread of scarlet,  thy mouth is comely. Thy temples are like a piece of a pomegranate behind thy veil.
Song. Thy neck is like the tower of David built for an armory, on which there hang a thousand bucklers, all the shields of the mighty men.
Song. Thy two breasts are like two fawns that are twins of a roe, which feed among the lilies.
Song. Until the day is cool,  the shadows flee away, I will get me to the mountain of myrrh,  to the hill of frankincense.
Song. Thou are all fair, my love,  there is no spot in thee.
Song. Come with me from Lebanon, my bride, with me from Lebanon. Look from the top of Amana, from the top of Senir and Hermon, from the lions' dens, from the mountains of the leopards.
Song. Thou have ravished my heart, my sister, my bride. Thou have ravished my heart with one of thine eyes, with one chain of thy neck.
Song. How fair is thy love, my sister, my bride! How much better is thy love than wine,  the fragrance of thine oils than all manner of spices!
Song. Thy lips, O my bride, drop the honeycomb. Honey and milk are under thy tongue,  the smell of thy garments is like the smell of Lebanon.
Song. A garden shut up is my sister, my bride, a spring shut up, a fountain sealed.
Song. Thy shoots are an orchard of pomegranates, with precious fruits, henna with spikenard plants,
Song. spikenard and saffron, calamus and cinnamon, with all trees of frankincense, myrrh and aloes, with all the chief spices.
Song. Thou are a fountain of gardens, a well of living waters,  flowing streams from Lebanon.
Song. Awake, O north wind,  come, thou south, blow upon my garden, that the spices of it may flow out. Let my beloved come into his garden,  eat his precious fruits.
Song. I have come into my garden, my sister, my bride. I have gathered my myrrh with my spice. I have eaten my honeycomb with my honey. I have drunk my wine with my milk. Eat, O friends. Drink, yea. Drink abundantly, O beloved.
Song. I was asleep,  my heart awoke. It is the voice of my beloved who knocks, saying, Open to me, my sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled. For my head is filled with dew, my locks with the drops of the night.
Song. I have put off my garment, how shall I put it on? I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them?
Song. My beloved put in his hand by the hole of the door,  my heart was moved for him.
Song. I rose up to open to my beloved,  my hands drops with myrrh,  my fingers with liquid myrrh, upon the handles of the bolt.
Song. I opened to my beloved,  my beloved had withdrawn himself,  was gone. My soul had failed me when he spoke. I sought him,  I could not find him. I called him,  he gave me no answer.
Song. The watchmen who go about the city found me. They smote me, they wounded me. The keepers of the walls took away my mantle from me.
Song. I adjure you, O daughters of Jerusalem, if ye find my beloved, that ye tell him that I am sick from love.
Song. What is thy beloved more than another beloved, O thou fairest among women? What is thy beloved more than another beloved, that thou do so adjure us?
Song. My beloved is white and ruddy, the chief among ten thousand.
Song. His head is the most fine gold. His locks are bushy, black as a raven.
Song. His eyes are like doves beside the water-brooks, washed with milk, fitly set.
Song. His cheeks are as a bed of spices, banks of sweet herbs. His lips are lilies, dropping liquid myrrh.
Song. His hands are rings of gold set with beryl. His body is ivory work overlaid with sapphires.
Song. His legs are pillars of marble, set upon sockets of fine gold. His aspect is like Lebanon, excellent as the cedars.
Song. His mouth is most sweet. Yea, he is altogether lovely. This is my beloved,  this is my friend, O daughters of Jerusalem.
Song. Where has thy beloved gone, O thou fairest among women? Where has thy beloved turned, that we may seek him with thee?
Song. My beloved has gone down to his garden, to the beds of spices, to feed in the gardens,  to gather lilies.
Song. I am my beloved's,  my beloved is mine. He feeds among the lilies.
Song. Thou are fair, O my love, as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem, sublime as an army with banners.
Song. Turn away thine eyes from me, for they have overcome me. Thy hair is as a flock of goats that lie along the side of Gilead.
Song. Thy teeth are like a flock of ewes, which have come up from the washing, of which every one has twins,  none is bereaved among them.
Song. Thy temples are like a piece of a pomegranate behind thy veil.
Song. There are sixty queens,  eighty concubines,  virgins without number.
Song. My dove, my undefiled, is but one. She is the only one of her mother. She is the choice one of her who bore her. The daughters saw her,  called her blessed, yea, the queens and the concubines,  they praised her.
Song. Who is she who looks forth as the morning, fair as the moon, clear as the sun, sublime as an army with banners?
Song. I went down into the garden of nuts, to see the green plants of the valley, to see whether the vine budded,  the pomegranates were in flower.
Song. Before I was aware, my soul set me among the chariots of my princely people.
Song. Return, return, O Shulammite, return, return, that we may look upon thee. Why will ye look upon the Shulammite, as upon the dance of two armies?
Song. How beautiful are thy feet in sandals, O prince's daughter! Thy rounded thighs are like jewels, the work of the hands of a skilful workman.
Song. Thy body is a round goblet, no mingled wine is wanting. Thy waist is a heap of wheat set about with lilies.
Song. Thy two breasts are like two fawns that are twins of a roe.
Song. Thy neck is like the tower of ivory. Thine eyes, the pools in Heshbon, by the gate of Bath-rabbim. Thy nose is like the tower of Lebanon which looks toward Damascus.
Song. Thy head upon thee is like Carmel,  the hair of thy head like purple. The king is held captive in the tresses.
Song. How fair and how pleasant thou are, O love, for delights!
Song. This thy stature is like to a palm tree,  thy breasts to its clusters.
Song. I said, I will climb up into the palm tree. I will take hold of the branches of it. Let thy breasts be as clusters of the vine,  the smell of thy breath like apples,
Song. and thy mouth like the best wine, that goes down smoothly for my beloved, gliding through the lips and teeth.
Song. I am my beloved's,  his desire is toward me.
Song. Come, my beloved, let us go forth into the field. Let us lodge in the villages.
Song. Let us get up early to the vineyards. Let us see whether the vine has budded, its blossom is open, the pomegranates are in flower. There I will give thee my love.
Song. The mandrakes give forth fragrance. And at our doors are all manner of precious fruits, new and old, which I have laid up for thee, O my beloved.
Song. Oh that thou were as my brother, who sucked the breasts of my mother! When I should find thee outside, I would kiss thee. Yes,  none would despise me.
Song. I would lead thee,  bring thee into my mother's house, who would instruct me. I would cause thee to drink of spiced wine, of the juice of my pomegranate.
Song. His left hand under my head,  his right hand should embrace me.
Song. I adjure you, O daughters of Jerusalem, that ye stir not up, nor awake love, until it please.
Song. Who is this who comes up from the wilderness, leaning upon her beloved? Under the apple tree I awoke thee. There thy mother was in travail with thee. There she who brought thee forth was in travail.
Song. Set me as a seal upon thy heart, as a seal upon thine arm. For love is strong as death, jealousy is cruel as Sheol. The flashes of it are flashes of fire, a most vehement flame.
Song. Many waters cannot quench love, nor can floods drown it. If a man would give all the substance of his house for love, he would be utterly scorned.
Song. We have a little sister,  she has no breasts. What shall we do for our sister in the day when she shall be spoken for?
Song. If she is a wall, we will build upon her a turret of silver. And if she is a door, we will enclose her with boards of cedar.
Song. I am a wall,  my breasts like the towers. Then I was in his eyes as one who found peace.
Song. Solomon had a vineyard at Baal-hamon. He let out the vineyard to keepers. Every one for the fruit of it was to bring a thousand pieces of silver.
Song. My vineyard, which is mine, is before me. Thou, O Solomon, shall have the thousand,  those who keep the fruit of it, two hundred.
Song. Thou who dwell in the gardens, the companions hearken for thy voice. Cause me to hear it.
Song. Make haste, my beloved,  be thou like to a roe or to a young hart upon the mountains of spices.
Isaiah
The vision of Isaiah the son of Amoz, which he saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem, in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz,  Hezekiah, kings of Judah.
Hear, O heavens,  give ear, O earth, for Jehovah has spoken. I have nourished and brought up sons,  they have rebelled against me.
The ox knows his owner,  the donkey his master's crib,  Israel does not know; my people does not consider.
Ah sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of evildoers, sons who deal corruptly! They have forsaken Jehovah. They have despised the Holy One of Israel. They have gone away backward.
Why will ye still be stricken, that ye revolt more and more? The whole head is sick,  the whole heart faint.
From the sole of the foot even to the head there is no soundness in it,  wounds,  bruises,  fresh stripes. They have not been closed nor bound up nor soothed with oil.
Your country is desolate. Your cities are burned with fire. Your land-strangers devour it in your presence,  it is desolate, as overthrown by strangers.
the daughter of Zion is left as a booth in a vineyard, as a shed in a garden of cucumbers, as a besieged city.
Unless Jehovah of hosts had left to us a seed, we should have been as Sodom, we should have been like Gomorrah.
Hear the word of Jehovah, ye rulers of Sodom, give ear to the law of our God, ye people of Gomorrah.
What to me is the multitude of your sacrifices? says Jehovah. I have had enough of the burnt offerings of rams,  the fat of fed beasts. And I do not delight in the blood of bullocks or of lambs or of he-goats.
When ye come to appear before me, who has required this at your hand-to trample my courts?
Bring no more vain oblations. Incense is an abomination to me. New moon and sabbath, the calling of assemblies-I cannot bear iniquity and the solemn meeting.
Your new moons and your appointed feasts my soul hates. They are a trouble to me. I am weary of bearing them.
when ye spread forth your hands, I will hide my eyes from you. Yea, when ye make many prayers, I will not hear; your hands are full of blood.
Wash you, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings from before my eyes. Cease to do evil.
Learn to do good. Seek justice, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow.
Come now,  let us reason together, says Jehovah, though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow. Though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool.
If ye are willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land.
But if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be devoured with the sword, for the mouth of Jehovah has spoken it.
How the faithful city has become a harlot! She who was full of justice! Righteousness lodged in her,  now murderers.
Thy silver has become dross, thy wine mixed with water.
Thy rulers are rebellious,  companions of thieves. Everyone loves bribes,  follows after rewards. They judge not the fatherless, nor does the cause of the widow come to them.
Therefore says the Lord, Jehovah of hosts, the Mighty One of Israel, Ah, I will ease me of my adversaries,  avenge me of my enemies.
I will turn my hand upon thee,  thoroughly purge away thy dross,  will take away all thy tin.
I will restore thy judges as at the first,  thy counselors as at the beginning. Afterward thou shall be called the city of righteousness, a faithful town.
Zion shall be redeemed with justice,  her converts with righteousness.
But the destruction of transgressors and sinners shall be together,  those who forsake Jehovah shall be consumed.
For they shall be ashamed of the oaks which ye have desired,  ye shall be confounded for the gardens that ye have chosen.
For ye shall be as an oak whose leaf fades,  as a garden that has no water.
the strong man shall be as flax,  his work as a spark. And they shall both burn together,  none shall quench them.
The word that Isaiah the son of Amoz saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem.
it shall come to pass in the latter days, that the mountain of Jehovah's house shall be established on the top of the mountains,  shall be exalted above the hills,  all nations shall flow to it.
many peoples shall go and say, Come ye,  let us go up to the mountain of Jehovah, to the house of the God of Jacob,  he will teach us of his ways,  we will walk in his paths. For out of Zion shall go forth the law,  the word of Jehovah from Jerusalem.
he will judge between the nations,  will decide concerning many peoples,  they shall beat their swords into plowshares,  their spears into pruning-hooks. Nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more.
O house of Jacob, come ye,  let us walk in the light of Jehovah.
For thou have forsaken thy people the house of Jacob, because they are filled with things from the east,  are soothsayers like the Philistines. And they strike hands with the children of foreigners.
their land is full of silver and gold, neither is there any end of their treasures. Their land is also full of horses, neither is there any end of their chariots.
Their land is also full of idols. They worship the work of their own hands, that which their own fingers have made,
so the common man bows down,  the great man degrades himself. Therefore do not forgive them.
Enter into the rock,  hide thee in the dust, from before the terror of Jehovah,  from the glory of his majesty.
The lofty looks of man shall be brought low,  the haughtiness of men shall be bowed down,  Jehovah alone shall be exalted in that day.
For there shall be a day of Jehovah of hosts upon all that is proud and haughty,  upon all that is lifted up,  it shall be brought low,
upon all the cedars of Lebanon that are high and lifted up,  upon all the oaks of Bashan,
upon all the high mountains,  upon all the hills that are lifted up,
upon every lofty tower,  upon every fortified wall,
upon all the ships of Tarshish,  upon all pleasant imagery.
the loftiness of man shall be bowed down,  the haughtiness of men shall be brought low,  Jehovah alone shall be exalted in that day.
the idols shall utterly pass away.
men shall go into the caves of the rocks,  into the holes of the earth, from before the terror of Jehovah,  from the glory of his majesty, when he arises to shake the earth mightily.
In that day men shall cast away their idols of silver,  their idols of gold, which have been made for them to worship, to the moles and to the bats,
to go into the caverns of the rocks,  into the clefts of the ragged rocks, from before the terror of Jehovah,  from the glory of his majesty, when he arises to shake the earth mightily.
Cease ye from man, whose breath is in his nostrils, for how is he to be accounted of?
For, behold, the Lord, Jehovah of hosts, takes away from Jerusalem and from Judah support and staff, the whole support of bread,  the whole support of water,
the mighty man,  the man of war, the judge,  the prophet,  the diviner,  the elder,
the captain of fifty,  the honorable man,  the counselor,  the expert craftsman,  the skilful enchanter.
I will give sons to be their rulers,  babes shall rule over them.
the people shall be oppressed, every one by another,  every one by his neighbor. The child shall behave himself proudly against the old man,  the base against the honorable.
When a man shall take hold of his brother in the house of his father, saying, Thou have clothing, be thou our ruler,  let this ruin be under thy hand,
in that day he shall lift up his voice, saying, I will not be a healer, for in my house is neither bread nor clothing. Ye shall not make me ruler of the people.
For Jerusalem is ruined,  Judah is fallen, because their tongue and their doings are against Jehovah, to provoke the eyes of his glory.
The show of their countenance witnesses against them,  they declare their sin as Sodom; they do not hide it. Woe to their soul! For they have done evil to themselves.
Say ye of the righteous, that it is well, for they shall eat the fruit of their doings.
Woe to the wicked! It is ill with him, for what his hands have done shall be done to him.
As for my people, children are their oppressors,  women rule over them. O my people, those who lead thee cause thee to err,  destroy the way of thy paths.
Jehovah stands up to contend,  stands to judge the peoples.
Jehovah will enter into judgment with the elders of his people,  the rulers of it. It is ye who have eaten up the vineyard; the spoil of a poor man is in your houses.
What do ye mean that ye crush my people,  grind the face of the poor? says the Lord, Jehovah of hosts.
Moreover Jehovah said, Because the daughters of Zion are haughty,  walk with outstretched necks and wanton eyes, walking and mincing as they go,  making a tinkling with their feet,
therefore the Lord will smite with a scab the crown of the head of the daughters of Zion,  Jehovah will lay bare their secret parts.
In that day the Lord will take away the beauty of their anklets,  the hair nets,  the crescents,
the pendants,  the bracelets,  the mufflers,
the bonnets,  the ankle chains,  the sashes,  the perfume-boxes,  the amulets,
the rings,  the nose-jewels,
the festival robes,  the mantles,  the shawls,  the satchels,
the hand-mirrors,  the fine linen,  the turbans,  the veils.
it shall come to pass, that instead of sweet spices there shall be rottenness,  instead of a girdle, a rope,  instead of well set hair, baldness,  instead of a robe, a girding of sackcloth, branding instead of beauty.
Thy men shall fall by the sword,  thy mighty in the war.
her gates shall lament and mourn,  she shall be desolate and sit upon the ground.
seven women shall take hold of one man in that day, saying, We will eat our own bread,  wear our own apparel. Only let us be called by thy name; take thou away our reproach.
In that day the branch of Jehovah shall be beautiful and glorious,  the fruit of the land shall be excellent and comely for those who have escaped from Israel.
it shall come to pass, that he who is left in Zion,  he who remains in Jerusalem, shall be called holy, even everyone who is written among the living in Jerusalem,
when the Lord shall have washed away the filth of the daughters of Zion,  shall have purged the blood of Jerusalem from the midst of it, by the spirit of justice,  by the spirit of burning.
Jehovah will create over the whole habitation of mount Zion,  over her assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day,  the shining of a flaming fire by night, for over all the glory, a covering.
there shall be a pavilion for a shade in the daytime from the heat,  for a refuge,  for a covert from storm and from rain.
Let me sing for my well-beloved a song of my beloved concerning his vineyard. My well-beloved had a vineyard in a very fruitful hill.
he dug it,  gathered out the stones of it,  planted it with the choicest vine,  built a tower in the midst of it,  also hewed out a winepress in it. And he looked that it should bring forth grapes,  it brought forth wild grapes.
now, O inhabitants of Jerusalem and men of Judah, judge, I pray you, between me and my vineyard.
What could have been done more to my vineyard that I have not done in it? Why, when I looked that it should bring forth grapes, it brought forth wild grapes?
now I will tell you what I will do to my vineyard. I will take away the hedge of it,  it shall be eaten up. I will break down the wall of it,  it shall be trodden down.
I will lay it waste. It shall not be pruned nor hoed,  there shall come up briers and thorns. I will also command the clouds that they rain no rain upon it.
For the vineyard of Jehovah of hosts is the house of Israel,  the men of Judah his pleasant plant. And he looked for justice,  behold, oppression, for righteousness,  behold, a cry.
Woe to those who join house to house, who lay field to field, till there is no room,  ye be made to dwell alone in the midst of the land!
In my ears says Jehovah of hosts, of a truth many houses shall be desolate, even great and fair, without inhabitant.
For ten acres of vineyard shall yield one bath,  a homer of seed shall yield but an ephah.
Woe to those who rise up early in the morning, that they may follow strong drink, who tarry late into the night, till wine inflame them!
the harp and the lute, the tambourine and the pipe,  wine, are in their feasts,  they do not regard the work of Jehovah, nor have they considered the operation of his hands.
Therefore my people have gone into captivity for lack of knowledge,  their honorable men are famished,  their multitude are parched with thirst.
Therefore Sheol has enlarged its desire,  opened its mouth without measure. And their glory,  their multitude,  their pomp,  he who rejoices among them, descend into it.
the common man is bowed down,  the great man is debased,  the eyes of the lofty are humbled,
but Jehovah of hosts is exalted in justice,  God the Holy One is sanctified in righteousness.
Then the lambs shall feed as in their pasture,  wanderers shall eat the waste places of the fat ones.
Woe to those who draw iniquity with cords of falsehood,  sin as it were with a cart rope,
who say, Let him make speed, let him hasten his work, that we may see it. And let the counsel of the Holy One of Israel draw near and come, that we may know it!
Woe to those who call evil good,  good evil, who put darkness for light,  light for darkness, who put bitter for sweet,  sweet for bitter!
Woe to those who are wise in their own eyes,  prudent in their own sight!
Woe to those who are mighty to drink wine,  men of strength to mingle strong drink,
who justify the wicked for rewards,  take away the justice of the righteous man from him!
Therefore as the tongue of fire devours the stubble,  as the dry grass sinks down in the flame, so their root shall be as rottenness,  their blossom shall go up as dust, because they have rejected the law of Jehovah of hosts,  despised the word of the Holy One of Israel.
Therefore the anger of Jehovah is kindled against his people,  he has stretched forth his hand against them,  has smitten them. And the mountains tremble,  their dead bodies are as refuse in the midst of the streets. For all this his anger is not turned away,  his hand is stretched out still.
he will lift up an ensign to the nations from far,  will whistle for them from the end of the earth, , behold, they shall come with speed swiftly.
None shall be weary nor stumble among them. None shall slumber nor sleep, nor shall the belt of their loins be loosed, nor the latchet of their shoes be broken,
whose arrows are sharp,  all their bows bent. Their horses' hoofs shall be accounted as flint,  their wheels as a whirlwind.
Their roaring shall be like a lioness. They shall roar like young lions. Yea, they shall roar,  lay hold of the prey,  carry it away safe,  there shall be none to deliver.
they shall roar against them in that day like the roaring of the sea. And if a man looks to the land, behold, darkness and distress,  the light is darkened in the clouds of it.
In the year that king Uzziah died I saw the Lord sitting upon a throne, high and lifted up,  his train filled the temple.
Above him stood the seraphim. Each one had six wings, with two he covered his face,  with two he covered his feet,  with two he flew.
one cried to another,  said, Holy, holy, holy, is Jehovah of hosts. The whole earth is full of his glory.
the foundations of the thresholds shook at the voice of him who cried,  the house was filled with vapor.
Then I said, Woe is me! For I am undone, because I am a man of unclean lips,  I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips. For my eyes have seen the King, Jehovah of hosts.
Then one of the seraphim flew to me, having a live coal in his hand, which he had taken with the tongs from off the altar.
he touched my mouth with it,  said, Lo, this has touched thy lips,  thine iniquity is taken away,  thy sin forgiven.
I heard the voice of the Lord, saying, Whom shall I send,  who will go for us? Then I said, Lo, send me.
he said, Go,  tell this people, Hear ye indeed,  do not understand,  see ye indeed,  do not perceive.
Make the heart of this people fat,  make their ears heavy,  shut their eyes, lest they see with their eyes,  hear with their ears,  understand with their heart,  turn,  be healed.
Then I said, Lord, how long? And he answered, Until cities be waste without inhabitant,  houses without man,  the land become utterly waste,
Jehovah has removed men far away,  the forsaken places be many in the midst of the land.
if there be yet a tenth in it, it also shall in turn be eaten up. As a terebinth,  as an oak, whose stock remains when they are felled, so the holy seed is the stock of it.
it came to pass in the days of Ahaz the son of Jotham, the son of Uzziah, king of Judah, that Rezin the king of Syria,  Pekah the son of Remaliah, king of Israel, went up to Jerusalem to war against it,  could not prevail against it.
it was told the house of David, saying, Syria is allied with Ephraim. And his heart trembled,  the heart of his people, as the trees of the forest tremble with the wind.
Then Jehovah said to Isaiah, Go forth now to meet Ahaz, thou,  Shear-jashub thy son, at the end of the conduit of the upper pool, in the highway of the fuller's field.
say to him, Take heed,  be quiet. Fear not, nor let thy heart be faint, because of these two tails of smoking firebrands, for the fierce anger of Rezin and Syria,  of the son of Remaliah.
Because Syria, Ephraim,  the son of Remaliah, have purposed evil against thee, saying,
Let us go up against Judah,  vex it,  let us make a breach in it for us,  set up a king in the midst of it, even the son of Tabeel,
thus says the lord Jehovah: It shall not stand, nor shall it come to pass.
For the head of Syria is Damascus,  the head of Damascus is Rezin. And within sixty-five years Ephraim shall be broken in pieces, so that is shall not be a people.
the head of Ephraim is Samaria,  the head of Samaria is Remaliah's son. If ye will not believe, surely ye shall not be established.
Jehovah spoke again to Ahaz, saying,
Ask thee a sign of Jehovah thy God, ask it either in the depth, or in the height above.
But Ahaz said, I will not ask, nor will I test Jehovah.
he said, Hear ye now, O house of David. Is it a small thing for you to weary men, that ye will weary my God also?
Therefore the Lord himself will give you a sign: Behold, a virgin shall conceive,  bear a son,  shall call his name Immanuel.
Butter and honey shall he eat, when he knows to refuse the evil,  choose the good.
For before the child shall know to refuse the evil,  choose the good, the land whose two kings thou abhor shall be forsaken.
Jehovah will bring upon thee,  upon thy people,  upon thy father's house, days that have not come, from the day that Ephraim departed from Judah-even the king of Assyria.
it shall come to pass in that day, that Jehovah will whistle for the fly that is in the outermost part of the rivers of Egypt,  for the bee that is in the land of Assyria.
they shall come,  shall rest all of them in the desolate valleys,  in the clefts of the rocks,  upon all thorn-hedges,  upon all pastures.
In that day the Lord will shave with a razor what is hired in the parts beyond the River, even with the king of Assyria, the head and the hair of the feet,  it shall also consume the beard.
it shall come to pass in that day, that a man shall keep alive a young cow and two sheep.
it shall come to pass, that because of the abundance of milk which they shall give he shall eat butter. For everyone who is left in the midst of the land shall eat butter and honey.
it shall come to pass in that day, that every place where there were a thousand vines at a thousand silver coins, shall be for briers and thorns.
Men shall come there with arrows and with bow, because all the land shall be briers and thorns.
all the hills that were dug with the mattock, thou shall not come there for fear of briers and thorns,  it shall be for the sending forth of oxen,  for the treading of sheep.
Jehovah said to me, Take thee a great tablet,  write upon it with the pen of a man, For Maher-shalal-hash-baz.
I will take to me faithful witnesses to record, Uriah the priest,  Zechariah the son of Jeberechiah.
I went to the prophetess,  she conceived,  bore a son. Then Jehovah said to me, Call his name Maher-shalal-hash-baz.
For before the child shall have knowledge to cry, My father, , My mother, the riches of Damascus and the spoil of Samaria shall be carried away before the king of Assyria.
Jehovah spoke to me yet again, saying,
Inasmuch as this people have refused the waters of Shiloah that go softly,  rejoice in Rezin and Remaliah's son,
now therefore, behold, the Lord brings up upon them the waters of the River, strong and many, even the king of Assyria and all his glory. And it shall come up over all its channels,  go over all its banks,
it shall sweep onward into Judah. It shall overflow and pass through; it shall reach even to the neck. And the stretching out of its wings shall fill the breadth of thy land, O Immanuel.
Make an uproar, O ye peoples,  be broken in pieces. And give ear, all ye of far countries. Gird yourselves,  be broken in pieces. Gird yourselves,  be broken in pieces.
Take counsel together,  it shall be brought to nothing. Speak the word,  it shall not stand, for God is with us.
For Jehovah spoke thus to me with a strong hand,  instructed me not to walk in the way of this people, saying,
Say ye not, A conspiracy, concerning all of which this people shall say, A conspiracy, nor fear ye their fear, nor be in dread of it.
Jehovah of hosts, him ye shall sanctify,  let him be your fear,  let him be your dread.
he shall be for a sanctuary,  for a stone of stumbling and for a rock of offense to both the houses of Israel, for a net and for a snare to the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
many shall stumble on it,  fall,  be broken,  be snared,  be taken.
Bind thou up the testimony. Seal the law among my disciples.
I will wait for Jehovah, who hides his face from the house of Jacob,  I will be a man who has trusted in him.
Behold, I and the children whom Jehovah has given me are for signs and for wonders in Israel from Jehovah of hosts, who dwells in mount Zion.
when they shall say to you, Seek for those who have familiar spirits and for the wizards, who chirp and who mutter, should not a people seek for their God? On behalf of the living seek to the dead?
Seek to the law and to the testimony! If they speak not according to this word, surely there is no morning for them.
they shall pass through it, greatly distressed and hungry. And it shall come to pass that, when they shall be hungry, they shall fret themselves,  curse by their king and by their God,  turn their faces upward.
they shall look to the earth, , behold, distress and darkness, the gloom of anguish,  into thick darkness to be driven away.
But there shall be no gloom to her who was in anguish. In the former time he brought into contempt the land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali,  in the latter time he has made it glorious, by the way of the sea, beyond the Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles.
The people who walked in darkness have seen a great light. Those who dwelt in the land of the shadow of death, upon them the light has shone.
Thou have multiplied the nation. Thou have increased their joy. They joy before thee according to the joy in harvest, as men rejoice when they divide the spoil.
For the yoke of his burden,  the staff of his shoulder, the rod of his oppressor, thou have broken as in the day of Midian.
For all the armor of the armed man in the tumult,  the garments rolled in blood, shall be for burning, for fuel of fire.
For to us a child is born, to us a son is given. And the government shall be upon his shoulder. And his name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, Mighty God, Father of Eternity, Prince of Peace.
Of the increase of his government and of peace there shall be no end, upon the throne of David,  upon his kingdom, to establish it,  to uphold it with justice and with righteousness from henceforth even forever. The zeal of Jehovah of hosts will perform this.
The Lord sent a word into Jacob,  it has lighted upon Israel.
all the people shall know, even Ephraim and the inhabitant of Samaria, who say in pride and in arrogance of heart,
The bricks are fallen,  we will build with hewn stone, the sycamores are cut down,  we will put cedars in their place.
Therefore Jehovah will set up on high against him the adversaries of Rezin,  will stir up his enemies,
the Syrians in front,  the Philistines behind,  they shall devour Israel with open mouth. For all this his anger is not turned away,  his hand is stretched out still.
Yet the people have not turned to him who smote them, nor have they sought Jehovah of hosts.
Therefore Jehovah will cut off from Israel head and tail, palm-branch and rush, in one day.
The elder and the honorable man, he is the head. And the prophet who teaches lies, he is the tail.
For those who lead this people cause them to err,  those who are led by them are destroyed.
Therefore the Lord will not rejoice over their young men, nor will he have compassion on their fatherless and widows. For everyone is profane and an evildoer,  every mouth speaks folly. For all this his anger is not turned away,  his hand is stretched out still.
For wickedness burns as the fire. It devours the briers and thorns. Yea, it kindles in the thickets of the forest,  they roll upward in a column of smoke.
Through the wrath of Jehovah of hosts is the land burnt up,  the people are as the fuel of fire; no man spares his brother.
he shall snatch on the right hand,  be hungry. And he shall eat on the left hand,  they shall not be satisfied. They shall eat every man the flesh of his own arm-
Manasseh, Ephraim,  Ephraim, Manasseh,  together they shall be against Judah. For all this his anger is not turned away,  his hand is stretched out still.
Woe to those who decree unrighteous decrees,  to the writers who write perverseness,
to turn aside the needy from justice,  to rob the poor of my people of their right, that widows may be their spoil,  that they may make the fatherless their prey!
what will ye do in the day of visitation,  in the desolation which shall come from far? To whom will ye flee for help? And where will ye leave your glory?
They shall only bow down under the prisoners,  shall fall under the slain. For all this his anger is not turned away,  his hand is stretched out still.
Ho, Assyrian, the rod of my anger, the staff in whose hand is my indignation!
I will send him against a profane nation,  against the people of my wrath. I will give him a charge, to take the spoil,  to take the prey,  to tread them down like the mire of the streets.
However he does not so reason, nor does his heart so think,  it is in his heart to destroy,  to cut off nations not a few.
For he says, Are not my rulers all of them kings?
Is not Calno as Carchemish? Is not Hamath as Arpad? Is not Samaria as Damascus?
As my hand has found the kingdoms of the idols, whose graven images excelled those of Jerusalem and of Samaria,
shall I not, as I have done to Samaria and her idols, so do to Jerusalem and her idols?
Therefore it shall come to pass, that, when the Lord has performed his whole work upon mount Zion and on Jerusalem, I will punish the fruit of the arrogant heart of the king of Assyria,  the glory of his high looks.
For he has said, By the strength of my hand I have done it,  by my wisdom, for I have understanding. And I have removed the bounds of the peoples,  have robbed their treasures. And like a valiant man I have brought down those who sit on thrones.
my hand has found as a nest the riches of the peoples. And like a gathering of eggs that are forsaken, I have gathered all the earth. And there was none that moved the wing, or that opened the mouth, or chirped.
Shall the axe boast itself against him who hews with it? Shall the saw magnify itself against him who wields it? As if a rod should wield those who lift it up, or as if a staff should lift up him who is not wood.
Therefore will the Lord, Jehovah of hosts, send among his fat ones, leanness,  under his glory there shall be kindled a burning like the burning of fire.
the light of Israel will be for a fire,  his Holy One for a flame,  it will burn and devour his thorns and his briers in one day.
he will consume the glory of his forest,  of his fruitful field, both soul and body. And it shall be as when a standard-bearer faints.
the remnant of the trees of his forest shall be few, so that a child may write them.
it shall come to pass in that day, that the remnant of Israel,  those who are escaped of the house of Jacob, shall no more again lean upon him who smote them,  shall lean upon Jehovah, the Holy One of Israel, in truth.
A remnant shall return, even the remnant of Jacob, to the mighty God.
For though thy people, Israel, be as the sand of the sea, a remnant of them shall return. A destruction is determined, overflowing with righteousness.
For a full end,  that determined, the Lord, Jehovah of hosts, will make in the midst of all the earth.
Therefore thus says the Lord, Jehovah of hosts, O my people who dwell in Zion, be not afraid of the Assyrian, though he smites thee with the rod,  lifts up his staff against thee, according to the manner of Egypt.
For yet a very little while,  the indignation shall be accomplished,  my anger is to his destruction.
Jehovah of hosts will stir up against him a scourge as in the slaughter of Midian at the rock of Oreb. And his rod will be over the sea,  he will lift it up according to the manner of Egypt.
it shall come to pass in that day, that his burden shall depart from off thy shoulder,  his yoke from off thy neck,  the yoke shall be destroyed because of fatness.
He has come to Aiath. He has passed through Migron. At Michmash he lays up his baggage.
They have gone over the pass. They have taken up their lodging at Geba. Ramah trembles. Gibeah of Saul has fled.
Cry aloud with thy voice, O daughter of Gallim! Hearken, O Laishah! O thou poor Anathoth!
Madmenah is a fugitive. The inhabitants of Gebim flee for safety.
This very day he shall halt at Nob. He shakes his hand at the mount of the daughter of Zion, the hill of Jerusalem.
Behold, the Lord, Jehovah of hosts, will lop off the boughs with terror. And the high of stature shall be hewn down,  the lofty shall be brought low.
he will cut down the thickets of the forest with iron,  Lebanon shall fall by a mighty one.
there shall come forth a shoot out of the stock of Jesse. And a branch out of his roots shall bear fruit.
the Spirit of Jehovah shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of Jehovah.
his delight shall be in the fear of Jehovah. And he shall not judge according to the sight of his eyes, nor decide according to the hearing of his ears,
but with righteousness he shall judge the poor,  decide with equity for the meek of the earth. And he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth,  with the breath of his lips he shall kill the wicked.
righteousness shall be the belt of his waist,  faithfulness the belt of his loins.
the wolf shall dwell with the lamb,  the leopard shall lie down with the kid,  the calf and the young lion and the fatling together,  a little child shall lead them.
the cow and the bear shall feed; their young ones shall lie down together. And the lion shall eat straw like the ox.
the sucking child shall play on the hole of the asp,  the weaned child shall put his hand on the adder's den.
They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain, for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of Jehovah as the waters cover the sea.
in that day there shall be a root of Jesse,  he who arises to rule over the Gentiles. In him shall the Gentiles hope,  his resting-place shall be glorious.
it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord will set his hand again the second time to recover the remnant of his people, who shall remain, from Assyria,  from Egypt,  from Pathros,  from Cush,  from Elam,  from Shinar,  from Hamath,  from the islands of the sea.
he will set up an ensign for the nations,  will assemble the outcasts of Israel,  gather together the dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth.
Also the envy of Ephraim shall depart,  those who vex Judah shall be cut off. Ephraim shall not envy Judah,  Judah shall not vex Ephraim.
they shall fly down upon the shoulder of the Philistines on the west. Together they shall despoil the sons of the east. They shall put forth their hand upon Edom and Moab,  the sons of Ammon shall obey them.
Jehovah will utterly destroy the tongue of the Egyptian sea. And with his scorching wind he will wave his hand over the River,  will smite it into seven streams,  cause men to march over dry shod.
there shall be a highway for the remnant of his people, who shall remain, from Assyria, like as there was for Israel in the day that he came up out of the land of Egypt.
in that day thou shall say, I will give thanks to thee, O Jehovah, for though thou were angry with me. Thine anger is turned away and thou comfort me.
Behold, God is my salvation. I will trust,  will not be afraid, for Jehovah, even Jehovah, is my strength and song,  he has become my salvation.
Therefore with joy ye shall draw water out of the wells of salvation.
in that day ye shall say, Give thanks to Jehovah. Call upon his name. Declare his doings among the peoples. Make mention that his name is exalted.
Sing to Jehovah, for he has done excellent things. Let this be known in all the earth.
Cry aloud and shout, thou inhabitant of Zion, for great in the midst of thee is the Holy One of Israel.
The burden of Babylon, which Isaiah the son of Amoz saw.
Set ye up an ensign upon the bare mountain. Lift up the voice to them. Wave the hand, that they may go into the gates of the nobles.
I have commanded my consecrated ones, yea, I have called my mighty men for my anger, even my proudly exulting ones.
The noise of a multitude in the mountains, as of a great people! The noise of a tumult of the kingdoms of the nations gathered together! Jehovah of hosts is mustering the army for the battle.
They come from a far country, from the outermost part of heaven, even Jehovah,  the weapons of his indignation, to destroy the whole land.
Wail ye, for the day of Jehovah is at hand. It shall come as destruction from the Almighty.
Therefore all hands shall be feeble,  every heart of man shall melt.
they shall be dismayed. Pangs and sorrows shall take hold. They shall be in pain as a woman in travail. They shall look in amazement one at another, their faces, faces of flame.
Behold, the day of Jehovah comes, cruel, with wrath and fierce anger, to make the land a desolation,  to destroy the sinners thereof out of it.
For the stars of heaven and the constellations of it shall not give their light. The sun shall be darkened in its going forth,  the moon shall not cause its light to shine.
I will punish the world for the evil,  the wicked for their iniquity. And I will cause the arrogance of the proud to cease,  will lay low the haughtiness of the terrible.
I will make a man more rare than fine gold, even a man than the pure gold of Ophir.
Therefore I will make the heavens to tremble,  the earth shall be shaken out of its place, in the wrath of Jehovah of hosts,  in the day of his fierce anger.
it shall come to pass, that as the chased roe,  as sheep that no man gathers, they shall turn every man to his own people,  shall flee every man to his own land.
Everyone who is found shall be thrust through,  everyone who is taken shall fall by the sword.
Their infants also shall be dashed in pieces before their eyes. Their houses shall be rifled,  their wives ravished.
Behold, I will stir up the Medes against them, who shall not regard silver,  as for gold, they shall not delight in it.
their bows shall dash the young men in pieces. And they shall have no pity on the fruit of the womb; their eye shall not spare children.
Babylon, the glory of kingdoms, the beauty of the Chaldeans' pride, shall be as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah.
It shall never be inhabited, nor shall it be dwelt in from generation to generation. Neither shall the Arabian pitch tent there, nor shall shepherds make their flocks to lie down there.
But wild beasts of the desert shall lie there,  their houses shall be full of doleful creatures. And ostriches shall dwell there,  wild goats shall dance there.
wolves shall cry in their castles,  jackals in the pleasant palaces. And her time is near to come,  her days shall not be prolonged.
For Jehovah will have compassion on Jacob,  will yet choose Israel,  set them in their own land. And the sojourner shall join himself with them,  they shall cling to the house of Jacob.
the peoples shall take them,  bring them to their place. And the house of Israel shall possess them in the land of Jehovah for servants and for handmaids. And they shall take them captive whose captives they were,  they shall rule over their oppressors.
it shall come to pass in the day that Jehovah shall give thee rest from thy sorrow,  from thy trouble,  from the hard service in which thou were made to serve,
that thou shall take up this taunt against the king of Babylon,  say, How has the oppressor ceased, the golden city ceased!
Jehovah has broken the staff of the wicked, the scepter of the rulers,
who smote the peoples in wrath with a continual stroke, who ruled the nations in anger, with a persecution that none restrained.
The whole earth is at rest,  is quiet. They break forth into singing.
Yea, the fir trees rejoice at thee,  the cedars of Lebanon, saying, Since thou are laid low, no hewer has come up against us.
Sheol from beneath is moved for thee, to meet thee at thy coming. It stirs up the dead for thee, even all the chief ones of the earth. It has raised up from their thrones all the kings of the nations.
They shall all answer and say to thee, Have thou also become weak as we? Have thou become like us?
Thy pomp is brought down to Sheol,  the noise of thy viols. The worm is spread under thee,  worms cover thee.
How thou are fallen from heaven, O day-star, son of the morning! How thou are cut down to the ground, who laid the nations low!
thou said in thy heart, I will ascend into heaven. I will exalt my throne above the stars of God,  I will sit upon the mount of congregation, in the outermost parts of the north.
I will ascend above the heights of the clouds. I will make myself like the Most High.
Yet thou shall be brought down to Sheol, to the utmost parts of the pit.
Those who see thee shall gaze at thee. They shall consider thee, saying, Is this the man who made the earth to tremble, who shook kingdoms,
who made the world as a wilderness,  overthrew the cities of it, who did not let loose his prisoners to their home?
All the kings of the nations, all of them, sleep in glory, each one in his own house.
But thou are cast forth away from thy sepulcher like an abominable branch, clothed with the slain, who are thrust through with the sword, who go down to the stones of the pit, as a dead body trodden under foot.
Thou shall not be joined with them in burial, because thou have destroyed thy land. Thou have slain thy people. The seed of evildoers shall not be named forever.
Prepare ye slaughter for his sons for the iniquity of their fathers, that they not rise up,  possess the earth,  fill the face of the world with cities.
I will rise up against them, says Jehovah of hosts,  cut off from Babylon name and remnant,  son and son's son, says Jehovah.
I will also make it a possession for the porcupine,  pools of water. And I will sweep it with the broom of destruction, says Jehovah of hosts.
Jehovah of hosts has sworn, saying, Surely, as I have thought, so shall it come to pass,  as I have purposed, so shall it stand,
that I will break the Assyrian in my land,  tread him under foot upon my mountains. Then shall his yoke depart from off them,  his burden depart from off their shoulder.
This is the purpose that is purposed upon the whole earth,  this is the hand that is stretched out upon all the nations.
For Jehovah of hosts has purposed,  who shall annul it? And his hand is stretched out,  who shall turn it back?
In the year that king Ahaz died was this burden.
Rejoice not, O Philistia, all of thee, because the rod that smote thee is broken. For out of the serpent's root shall come forth an adder,  his fruit shall be a fiery flying serpent.
the firstborn of the poor shall feed,  the needy shall lie down in safety. And I will kill thy root with famine,  thy remnant shall be slain.
Howl, O gate, cry, O city. Thou are melted away, O Philistia, all of thee. For there comes a smoke out of the north,  there is no straggler in his ranks.
What then shall a man answer the messengers of the nation? That Jehovah has founded Zion,  in her shall the afflicted of his people take refuge.
The burden of Moab. For in a night Ar of Moab is laid waste,  brought to nothing. For in a night Kir of Moab is laid waste,  brought to nothing.
They have gone up to Bayith,  to Dibon, to the high places, to weep. Moab wails over Nebo,  over Medeba. On all their heads is baldness. Every beard is cut off.
In their streets they gird themselves with sackcloth. On their housetops,  in their broad places, everyone wails, weeping abundantly.
Heshbon cries out,  Elealeh. Their voice is heard even to Jahaz. Therefore the armed men of Moab cry aloud. His soul trembles within him.
My heart cries out for Moab. Her nobles flee to Zoar, to Eglath-shelishi-yah. For they go up with weeping by the ascent of Luhith. For they raise up a cry of destruction in the way of Horonaim.
For the waters of Nimrim shall be desolate, for the grass is withered away. The tender grass fails. There is no green thing.
Therefore the abundance they have gotten,  that which they have laid up, they shall carry away over the brook of the willows.
For the cry has gone round about the borders of Moab, the wailing of it to Eglaim,  the wailing of it to Beer-elim.
For the waters of Dimon are full of blood. For I will bring yet more upon Dimon, a lion upon those of Moab who escape,  upon the remnant of the land.
Send ye the lambs for the ruler of the land from Selah to the wilderness, to the mount of the daughter of Zion.
For it shall be that, as wandering birds, as a scattered nest, so shall the daughters of Moab be at the fords of the Arnon.
Give counsel, execute justice, make thy shade as the night in the midst of the noonday. Hide the outcasts. Do not betray the fugitive.
Let my outcasts dwell with thee. As for Moab, be thou a covert to him from the face of the destroyer. For the extortioner is brought to nothing. Destruction ceases. The oppressors are consumed out of the land.
a throne shall be established in loving kindness,  he shall sit on it in truth, in the tent of David, judging,  seeking justice,  swift to do righteousness.
We have heard of the pride of Moab, that he is very proud, even of his arrogance,  his pride,  his wrath. His boastings are nothing.
Therefore Moab shall wail for Moab, everyone shall wail. Ye shall mourn for the raisin-cakes of Kir-hareseth, utterly stricken.
For the fields of Heshbon languish,  the vine of Sibmah. The lords of the nations have broken down the choice branches of it, which reached even to Jazer, which wandered into the wilderness. Its shoots were spread abroad. They passed over the sea.
Therefore I will weep with the weeping of Jazer for the vine of Sibmah. I will water thee with my tears, O Heshbon,  Elealeh. for upon thy summer fruits and upon thy harvest the battle shout has fallen.
gladness is taken away,  joy out of the fruitful field. And in the vineyards there shall be no singing nor joyful noise. No treader shall tread out wine in the presses. I have made the vintage shout to cease.
Therefore my heart sounds like a harp for Moab,  my inward parts for Kir-heres.
it shall come to pass, when Moab presents himself, when he wearies himself upon the high place,  shall come to his sanctuary to pray, that he shall not prevail.
This is the word that Jehovah spoke concerning Moab in time past.
But now Jehovah has spoken, saying, Within three years, as the years of a hireling, the glory of Moab shall be brought into contempt, with all his great multitude. And the remnant shall be very small and of no account.
The burden of Damascus. Behold, Damascus is taken away from being a city,  it shall be a ruinous heap.
The cities of Aroer are forsaken. They shall be for flocks, which shall lie down,  none shall make them afraid.
the fortress shall cease from Ephraim,  the kingdom from Damascus. And the remnant of Syria, they shall be as the glory of the sons of Israel, says Jehovah of hosts.
it shall come to pass in that day, that the glory of Jacob shall be made thin,  the fatness of his flesh shall grow lean.
it shall be as when the harvestman gathers the standing grain,  his arm reaps the ears. Yea, it shall be as when he gleans ears in the valley of Rephaim.
Yet there shall be gleanings left in it, as the shaking of an olive tree-two or three berries in the top of the uppermost bough, four or five in the outmost branches of a fruitful tree, says Jehovah, the God of Israel.
In that day men shall look to their maker,  their eyes shall have respect for the Holy One of Israel.
they shall not look to the altars, the work of their hands, nor shall they have respect for that which their fingers have made, either the Asherim, or the sun-images.
In that day their strong cities shall be as the forsaken places in the woodland and on the mountain top, which were forsaken from before the sons of Israel,  it shall be a desolation.
For thou have forgotten the God of thy salvation,  have not been mindful of the rock of thy strength. Therefore thou plant pleasant plants,  set it with foreign slips.
In the day of thy planting thou hedge it in,  in the morning thou make thy seed to blossom. But the harvest flees away in the day of grief and of desperate sorrow.
Ah, the uproar of many peoples, who roar like the roaring of the seas,  the rushing of nations, that rush like the rushing of mighty waters!
The nations shall rush like the rushing of many waters,  he shall rebuke them. And they shall flee far off,  shall be chased as the chaff of the mountains before the wind,  like the whirling dust before the storm.
At eventide, behold, terror,  before the morning they are not. This is the portion of those who despoil us,  the lot of those who rob us.
Ah, the land of the rustling of wings, which is beyond the rivers of Ethiopia,
that sends ambassadors by the sea, even in vessels of papyrus upon the waters, saying, Go, ye swift messengers, to a nation tall and smooth, to a people fearful from their beginning onward, a nation that metes out and treads down, whose land the rivers divide!
All ye inhabitants of the world,  ye dwellers on the earth, when an ensign is lifted up on the mountains, see ye,  when the trumpet is blown, hear ye.
For thus Jehovah has said to me, I will be still,  I will behold in my dwelling-place, like clear heat in sunshine, like a cloud of dew in the heat of harvest.
For before the harvest, when the blossom is over,  the flower becomes a ripening grape, he will cut off the sprigs with pruning-hooks,  he will take away and cut down the spreading branches.
They shall be left together to the ravenous birds of the mountains,  to the beasts of the earth. And the ravenous birds shall summer upon them,  all the beasts of the earth shall winter upon them.
In that time a present shall be brought to Jehovah of hosts from a people tall and smooth, even from a people fearful from their beginning onward, a nation that metes out and treads down, whose land the rivers divide, to the place of the name of Jehovah of hosts, the mount Zion.
The burden of Egypt. Behold, Jehovah rides upon a swift cloud,  comes to Egypt. And the idols of Egypt shall tremble at his presence,  the heart of Egypt shall melt in the midst of it.
I will stir up the Egyptians against the Egyptians,  they shall fight each one against his brother,  each one against his neighbor, city against city, kingdom against kingdom.
the spirit of Egypt shall fail in the midst of it,  I will destroy the counsel of it. And they shall seek for the idols,  for the charmers,  for those who have familiar spirits,  for the wizards.
I will give over the Egyptians into the hand of a cruel lord. And a fierce king shall rule over them, says the Lord, Jehovah of hosts.
the waters shall fail from the sea,  the river shall be wasted and become dry.
the rivers shall become foul. The streams of Egypt shall be diminished and dried up. The reeds and flags shall wither away.
The meadows by the Nile, by the brink of the Nile,  all the sown fields of the Nile, shall become dry, be driven away,  be no more.
the fishermen shall lament,  all those who cast a hook into the Nile shall mourn,  those who spread nets upon the waters shall languish.
Moreover those who work in combed flax,  those who weave white cloth, shall be confounded.
the pillars of Egypt shall be broken in pieces. All those who work for hire shall be grieved in soul.
The rulers of Zoan are utterly foolish. The counsel of the wisest counselors of Pharaoh has become brutish. How will ye say to Pharaoh, I am the son of wise men, the son of ancient kings?
Where then are thy wise men? And let them tell thee now,  let them know what Jehovah of hosts has purposed concerning Egypt.
The rulers of Zoan have become fools. The rulers of Memphis are deceived. They have caused Egypt to go astray, the chief of her tribes.
Jehovah has mingled a spirit of perverseness in the midst of her,  they have caused Egypt to go astray in every work of it, as a drunken man staggers in his vomit.
Neither shall there be for Egypt any work, which head or tail, palm-branch or rush, may do.
In that day the Egyptians shall be like women,  they shall tremble and fear because of the shaking of the hand of Jehovah of hosts, which he shakes over them.
the land of Judah shall become a terror to Egypt. Everyone to whom mention is made of it shall be afraid because of the purpose of Jehovah of hosts, which he purposes against it.
In that day there shall be five cities in the land of Egypt that speak the language of Canaan,  swear to Jehovah of hosts. One shall be called The city of destruction.
In that day shall there be an altar to Jehovah in the midst of the land of Egypt,  a pillar to Jehovah at the border of it.
it shall be for a sign and for a witness to Jehovah of hosts in the land of Egypt. For they shall cry to Jehovah because of oppressors,  he will send them a savior,  a defender,  he will deliver them.
Jehovah shall be known to Egypt,  the Egyptians shall know Jehovah in that day. Yea, they shall worship with sacrifice and oblation,  shall vow a vow to Jehovah,  shall perform it.
Jehovah will smite Egypt, smiting and healing,  they shall return to Jehovah. And he will be entreated by them,  will heal them.
In that day there shall be a highway out of Egypt to Assyria. And the Assyrian shall come into Egypt,  the Egyptian into Assyria,  the Egyptians shall worship with the Assyrians.
In that day Israel shall be the third with Egypt and with Assyria, a blessing in the midst of the earth,
in that Jehovah of hosts has blessed them, saying, Blessed be Egypt my people,  Assyria the work of my hands,  Israel my inheritance.
In the year that Tartan came to Ashdod, when Sargon the king of Assyria sent him,  he fought against Ashdod and took it,
at that time Jehovah spoke by Isaiah the son of Amoz, saying, Go,  loose the sackcloth from off thy loins,  put thy shoe from off thy foot. And he did so, walking naked and barefoot.
Jehovah said, Just as my servant Isaiah has walked naked and barefoot three years for a sign and a wonder concerning Egypt and concerning Ethiopia,
so shall the king of Assyria lead away the captives of Egypt,  the exiles of Ethiopia, young and old, naked and barefoot,  with buttocks uncovered, to the shame of Egypt.
they shall be dismayed and confounded because of Ethiopia their confidence,  of Egypt their glory.
the inhabitant of this coastland shall say in that day, Behold, such is our trust, where we fled for help to be delivered from the king of Assyria. And we, how shall we escape?
The burden of the wilderness of the sea. As whirlwinds in the South sweep through, it comes from the wilderness, from a terrible land.
A grievous vision is declared to me. The treacherous man deals treacherously,  the destroyer destroys. Go up, O Elam. Besiege, O Media, all the sighing of it I have made to cease.
Therefore my loins are filled with anguish. Pangs have taken hold upon me, as the pangs of a woman in travail. I am pained so that I cannot hear. I am dismayed so that I cannot see.
My heart flutters. Horror has frightened me. The twilight that I desired has been turned into trembling to me.
They prepare the table, they set the watch, they eat, they drink. Rise up, ye rulers, anoint the shield.
For thus has the Lord said to me, Go, set a watchman. Let him declare what he sees.
when he sees a troop, horsemen in pairs, a troop of donkeys, a troop of camels, he shall hearken diligently with much heed.
he cried out as a lion, O Lord, I stand continually upon the watchtower in the daytime,  am set in my ward whole nights,
and, behold, here comes a troop of men, horsemen in pairs. And he answered and said, Fallen, fallen is Babylon. And all the graven images of her gods are broken to the ground.
O my threshing,  the grain of my floor! That which I have heard from Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel, I have declared to you.
The burden of Dumah. He calls to me out of Seir, Watchman, what of the night? Watchman, what of the night?
The watchman said, The morning comes,  also the night. If ye will inquire, inquire ye; turn ye back, come.
The burden upon Arabia. In the forest in Arabia ye shall lodge, O ye caravans of Dedanites.
To him who was thirsty they brought water. The inhabitants of the land of Tema met the fugitives with their bread.
For they fled away from the swords, from the drawn sword,  from the bent bow,  from the grievousness of war.
For thus the Lord has said to me, Within a year, according to the years of a hireling, all the glory of Kedar shall fail.
the residue of the number of the archers, the mighty men of the sons of Kedar, shall be few. For Jehovah, the God of Israel, has spoken it.
The burden of the valley of vision. What troubles thee now, that thou have wholly gone up to the housetops?
O thou that are full of shoutings, a tumultuous city, a joyous town. Thy slain are not slain with the sword, nor are they dead in battle.
All thy rulers fled away together. They were bound by the archers. All who were found of thee were bound together; they fled afar off.
Therefore I said, Look away from me. I will weep bitterly. Labor not to comfort me for the destruction of the daughter of my people.
For it is a day of trouble,  of treading down,  of perplexity, from the Lord, Jehovah of hosts, in the valley of vision, a breaking down of the walls,  a crying to the mountains.
Elam bore the quiver, with chariots of men and horsemen,  Kir uncovered the shield.
it came to pass, that thy choicest valleys were full of chariots,  the horsemen set themselves in array at the gate.
he took away the covering of Judah,  thou looked in that day to the armor in the house of the forest.
ye saw the breaches of the city of David, that they were many. And to fortify the wall, ye gathered together the waters of the lower pool,
ye numbered the houses of Jerusalem,  ye broke down the houses.
Ye also made a reservoir between the two walls for the water of the old pool. But ye did not look to him who had done this, nor had ye respect to him who purposed it long ago.
in that day the Lord, Jehovah of hosts, called for weeping,  for mourning,  for baldness,  for girding with sackcloth.
And, behold, joy and gladness, slaying oxen and killing sheep, eating flesh and drinking wine. Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we shall die.
Jehovah of hosts revealed himself in my ears, Surely this iniquity shall not be forgiven you till ye die, says the Lord, Jehovah of hosts.
Thus says the Lord, Jehovah of hosts, Go, get thee to this treasurer, even to Shebna, who is over the house,  say,
What are thou doing here? And whom have thou here, that thou have hewed thee out here a sepulcher? Hewing him out a sepulcher on high, carving a habitation for himself in the rock!
Behold, Jehovah, like a strong man, will hurl thee away violently. Yea, he will wrap thee up closely.
He will surely wind thee round and round, tossing like a ball into a large country. There thou shall die,  there the chariots of thy glory shall be, thou shame of thy lord's house.
I will thrust thee from thine office,  thou shall be pulled down from thy station.
it shall come to pass in that day, that I will call my servant Eliakim the son of Hilkiah.
I will clothe him with thy robe,  strengthen him with thy belt. And I will commit thy government into his hand,  he shall be a father to the inhabitants of Jerusalem,  to the house of Judah.
I will lay the key of the house of David upon his shoulder,  he shall open,  none shall shut,  he shall shut,  none shall open.
I will fasten him as a nail in a sure place,  he shall be for a throne of glory to his father's house.
they shall hang upon him all the glory of his father's house, the offspring and the issue, every small vessel, from the cups even to all the flagons.
In that day, says Jehovah of hosts, the nail that was fastened in a sure place shall give way,  it shall be hewn down,  fall. And the burden that was upon it shall be cut off, for Jehovah has spoken it.
The burden of Tyre. Howl, ye ships of Tarshish, for it is laid waste, so that there is no house, no entering in. It is revealed to them from the land of Kittim.
Be still, ye inhabitants of the coast, thou whom the merchants of Sidon, who pass over the sea, have replenished.
on great waters the seed of the Shihor, the harvest of the Nile, was her revenue,  she was the mart of nations.
Be thou ashamed, O Sidon, for the sea has spoken, the stronghold of the sea, saying, I have not travailed, nor brought forth, neither have I nourished young men, nor brought up virgins.
When the report comes to Egypt, they shall be greatly pained at the report of Tyre.
Pass ye over to Tarshish. Wail, ye inhabitants of the coast.
Is this your joyous city, whose antiquity is of ancient days, whose feet carried her afar off to sojourn?
Who has purposed this against Tyre, the bestower of crowns, whose merchants are rulers, whose traders are the honored of the earth?
Jehovah of hosts has purposed it, to stain the pride of all glory, to bring into contempt all the honorable of the earth.
Pass through thy land as the Nile, O daughter of Tarshish, there is no restraint any more.
He has stretched out his hand over the sea. He has shaken the kingdoms. Jehovah has given commandment concerning Canaan, to destroy the strongholds of it.
he said, Thou shall no more rejoice, O thou oppressed virgin daughter of Sidon. Arise, pass over to Kittim, even there shall thou have no rest.
Behold, the land of the Chaldeans. This people once was not. The Assyrian founded it for those who dwell in the wilderness. They set up their towers. They raised up the palaces of it. Then they made it a ruin.
Howl, ye ships of Tarshish, for your stronghold is laid waste.
it shall come to pass in that day, that Tyre shall be forgotten seventy years, according to the days of one king. After the end of seventy years it shall be to Tyre as in the song of the harlot:
Take a harp, go about the city, thou harlot who has been forgotten. Make sweet melody, sing many songs, that thou may be remembered.
it came to pass after the end of seventy years, that Jehovah examined Tyre,  she has repented of her gift, that she play the harlot with all the kingdoms of the world upon the face of the earth.
her merchandise and her pay shall be holiness to Jehovah. It shall not be treasured nor laid up, for her merchandise shall be for those who dwell before Jehovah, to eat sufficiently,  for durable clothing.
Behold, Jehovah makes the earth empty,  makes it waste,  turns it upside down,  scatters abroad the inhabitants of it.
it shall be, as with the people, so with the priest, as with the servant, so with his master, as with the maid, so with her mistress, as with the buyer, so with the seller, as with the creditor, so with the debtor, as with the taker of interest, so with the giver of interest to him.
The earth shall be utterly emptied,  utterly laid waste, for Jehovah has spoken this word.
The earth mourns and fades away. The world languishes and fades away. The lofty people of the earth languish.
The earth also is polluted under the inhabitants of it, because they have transgressed the laws, violated the statutes, broken the everlasting covenant.
Therefore the curse has devoured the earth,  those who dwell in it are found guilty. Therefore the inhabitants of the earth are burned,  few men left.
The new wine mourns. The vine languishes. All the merry-hearted do sigh.
The mirth of tambourine ceases. The noise of those who rejoice ends. The joy of the harp ceases.
They shall not drink wine with a song. Strong drink shall be bitter to those who drink it.
The waste city is broken down. Every house is shut up, that no man may come in.
There is a crying in the streets because of the wine. All joy is darkened. The mirth of the land is gone.
Desolation is left in the city,  the gate is smitten with destruction.
For thus shall it be in the midst of the earth among the peoples, as the shaking of an olive tree, as the gleanings when the vintage is done.
These shall lift up their voice. They shall shout. For the majesty of Jehovah they cry aloud from the sea.
Therefore glorify ye Jehovah in the east, even the name of Jehovah, the God of Israel, in the isles of the sea.
From the outermost part of the earth we have heard songs. Glory to the righteous. But I said, I pine away, I pine away. Woe is me! The treacherous have dealt treacherously, yea, the treacherous have dealt very treacherously.
Fear,  the pit,  the snare, are upon thee, O inhabitant of the earth.
it shall come to pass, that he who flees from the noise of the fear shall fall into the pit,  he who comes up out of the midst of the pit shall be taken in the snare. For the windows on high are opened,  the foundations of the earth tremble.
The earth is utterly broken. The earth is torn apart. The earth is shaken violently.
The earth shall stagger like a drunken man,  shall sway to and fro like a hammock. And the transgression of it shall be heavy upon it,  it shall fall,  not rise again.
it shall come to pass in that day, that Jehovah will punish the host of the high ones on high,  the kings of the earth upon the earth.
they shall be gathered together as prisoners are gathered in the pit,  shall be shut up in the prison. And after many days they shall be visited.
Then the moon shall be confounded,  the sun ashamed, for Jehovah of hosts will reign in mount Zion and in Jerusalem. And glory shall be before his elders.
O Jehovah, thou are my God. I will exalt thee. I will praise thy name. For thou have done wonderful things, even counsels of old, in faithfulness and truth.
For thou have made of a city a heap, of a fortified city a ruin, a palace of strangers to be no city. It shall never be built.
Therefore a strong people shall glorify thee, a city of oppressive nations shall fear thee.
For thou have been a stronghold to a poor man, a stronghold to a needy man in his distress, a refuge from the storm, a shade from the heat, when the blast of the oppressors is as a storm against the wall.
As the heat in a dry place thou will bring down the noise of strangers, as the heat by the shade of a cloud, the song of the oppressors shall be brought low.
in this mountain Jehovah of hosts will make to all peoples a feast of fat things, a feast of wines on the dregs, of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the dregs well refined.
he will destroy on this mountain the face of the covering that covers all peoples,  the veil that is spread over all nations.
He will swallow up death in victory,  the lord Jehovah will wipe away tears from off all faces. And he will take away the reproach of his people from off all the earth. For Jehovah has spoken it.
it shall be said in that day, Lo, this is our God. We have waited for him,  he will save us. This is Jehovah. We have waited for him. We will be glad and rejoice in his salvation.
For the hand of Jehovah will rest on this mountain. And Moab shall be trodden down in his place, even as straw is trodden down in the water of the dunghill.
he shall spread forth his hands in the midst of it as he who swims spreads forth his hands to swim. But Jehovah will lay low his pride together with the craft of his hands.
the high fortress of thy walls he has brought down, laid low,  brought to the ground, even to the dust.
In that day this song shall be sung in the land of Judah: We have a strong city. He will appoint salvation for walls and bulwarks.
Open ye the gates, that the righteous nation which keeps faith may enter in.
Thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee, because he trusts in thee.
Trust ye in Jehovah forever, for in Jehovah, even Jehovah, is an everlasting rock.
For he has brought down those who dwell on high. The lofty city, he lays it low. He lays it low even to the ground. He brings it even to the dust.
The foot shall tread it down, even the feet of the poor,  the steps of the needy.
The way of the just is uprightness. Thou who are upright directs the path of the just.
Yea, in the way of thy judgments, O Jehovah, we have waited for thee, to thy name. Even to thy memorial, is the desire of our soul.
With my soul I have desired thee in the night. Yea, with my spirit within me I will seek thee earnestly. For when thy judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world learn righteousness.
Let favor be shown to a wicked man, yet he will not learn righteousness. In the land of uprightness he will deal wrongfully,  will not behold the majesty of Jehovah.
Jehovah, thy hand is lifted up, yet they do not see. But they shall see thy zeal for the people,  be put to shame. Yea, fire shall devour thine adversaries.
Jehovah, thou will ordain peace for us, for thou have also wrought all our works for us.
O Jehovah our God, other lords besides thee have had dominion over us,  by thee only we will make mention of thy name.
Being dead, they shall not live. Being deceased, they shall not rise. Therefore thou have visited and destroyed them,  made all remembrance of them to perish.
Thou have increased the nation, O Jehovah, thou have increased the nation. Thou are glorified. Thou have enlarged all the borders of the land.
Jehovah, in trouble they have visited thee, they poured out a prayer when thy chastening was upon them.
As a woman with child, who draws near the time of her delivery, is in pain and cries out in her pangs, so we have been before thee, O Jehovah.
We have been with child. We have been in pain. We have as it were brought forth wind. We have not wrought any deliverance in the earth, nor have the inhabitants of the world fallen.
Thy dead shall live. My dead bodies shall arise. Awake and sing, ye who dwell in the dust, for thy dew is as the dew of herbs,  the earth shall cast forth the dead.
Come, my people, enter thou into thy chambers,  shut thy doors around thee. Hide thyself for a little moment until the indignation be passed over.
For, behold, Jehovah comes forth out of his place to punish the inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity. The earth also shall disclose her blood,  shall no more cover her slain.
In that day Jehovah with his hard and great and strong sword will punish leviathan the swift serpent,  leviathan the crooked serpent,  he will kill the monster that is in the sea.
In that day is a vineyard of wine. Sing ye to it.
I Jehovah am its keeper, I will water it every moment. Lest any hurt it, I will guard it night and day.
Wrath is not in me. Would that the briers and thorns were against me in battle! I would march upon them. I would burn them together.
Or else let him take hold of my strength, that he may make peace with me. Yea, let him make peace with me.
In days to come Jacob shall take root; Israel shall blossom and bud. And they shall fill the face of the world with fruit.
Has he smitten them as he smote those who smote them? Or are they slain according to the slaughter of those who were slain by them?
In measure, in sending it forth, thou contend with it. He has removed with his rough blast in the day of the east wind.
Therefore by this the iniquity of Jacob shall be forgiven. And this is all the fruit of taking away his sin: that he makes all the stones of the altar as chalkstones that are beaten apart, so that the Asherim and the sun-images shall rise no more.
For the fortified city is solitary, a habitation deserted and forsaken like the wilderness. There the calf shall feed,  there he shall lie down,  consume the branches of it.
When the boughs of it are withered, they shall be broken off. The women shall come,  set them on fire, for it is a people of no understanding. Therefore he who made them will not have compassion upon them,  he who formed them will show them no favor.
it shall come to pass in that day, that Jehovah will beat off his fruit, from the flood of the River to the brook of Egypt. And ye shall be gathered one by one, O ye sons of Israel.
it shall come to pass in that day, that a great trumpet shall be blown. And they shall come who were ready to perish in the land of Assyria,  those who were outcasts in the land of Egypt. And they shall worship Jehovah in the holy mountain at Jerusalem.
Woe to the crown of pride of the drunkards of Ephraim,  to the fading flower of his glorious beauty, which is on the head of the fat valley of those who are overcome with wine!
Behold, the Lord has a mighty and strong one. As a tempest of hail, a destroying storm, as a tempest of mighty waters overflowing, he will cast down to the earth with the hand.
The crown of pride of the drunkards of Ephraim shall be trodden under foot.
the fading flower of his glorious beauty, which is on the head of the fat valley, shall be as the first-ripe fig before the summer, which, when he who looks upon it sees, while it is yet in his hand, he eats it up.
In that day Jehovah of hosts will become a crown of glory,  a diadem of beauty, to the residue of his people,
a spirit of justice to him who sits in judgment,  strength to those who turn back the battle at the gate.
even these reel with wine,  stagger with strong drink. The priest and the prophet reel with strong drink. They are swallowed up of wine. They stagger with strong drink; they err in vision; they stumble in judgment.
For all tables are full of vomit, filthiness, no place clean.
Whom will he teach knowledge? And whom will he make to understand the message? Those who are weaned from the milk,  drawn from the breasts?
For it is precept upon precept, precept upon precept, line upon line, line upon line, here a little, there a little.
No,  by men of strange lips and with another tongue he will speak to this people,
to whom he said, This is the rest. Give ye rest to him who is weary. And this is the refreshing. Yet they would not hear.
Therefore the word of Jehovah shall be to them precept upon precept, precept upon precept, line upon line, line upon line, here a little, there a little, that they may go,  fall backward,  be broken,  snared,  taken.
Therefore hear the word of Jehovah, ye scoffers, who rule this people that is in Jerusalem.
Because ye have said, We have made a covenant with death,  we are at agreement with Sheol. When the overflowing scourge shall pass through it shall not come to us, for we have made lies our refuge,  we have hid ourselves under falsehood.
Therefore thus says the lord Jehovah, Behold, I lay in Zion for a foundation, a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner-stone, a sure foundation. He who believes in him shall, no, not be shamed.
I will make justice the line,  righteousness the plummet. And the hail shall sweep away the refuge of lies,  the waters shall overflow the hiding-place.
your covenant with death shall be annulled,  your agreement with Sheol shall not stand. When the overflowing scourge shall pass through, then ye shall be trodden down by it.
As often as it passes though, it shall take you. For morning by morning it shall pass through, by day and by night. And it shall be nothing but terror to understand the report.
For the bed is shorter than what a man can stretch himself on it,  the covering narrower than what he can wrap himself in it.
For Jehovah will rise up as in mount Perazim. He will be angry as in the valley of Gibeon, that he may do his work, his strange work,  bring to pass his act, his strange act.
Now therefore be ye not scoffers, lest your bonds be made strong. For I have heard a decree of destruction from the Lord, Jehovah of hosts, upon the whole earth.
Give ye ear,  hear my voice, hearken,  hear my speech.
Does he who plows to sow plow continually? Does he continually open and harrow his ground?
When he has leveled the face of it, does he not cast abroad the chick-peas,  scatter the cummin,  put in the wheat in rows,  the barley in the appointed place,  the spelt in the border of it?
For his God instructs him aright,  teaches him.
For the chick-peas are not threshed with a sharp instrument, nor is a cart wheel turned about upon the cummin,  the chick-peas are beaten out with a staff,  the cummin with a rod.
Bread grain is ground, for he will not be always threshing it. And though the wheel of his cart and his horses scatter it, he does not grind it.
This also comes forth from Jehovah of hosts, who is wonderful in counsel,  excellent in wisdom.
Ho Ariel, Ariel, the city where David encamped! Add ye year to year. Let the feasts come round.
Then I will distress Ariel,  there shall be mourning and lamentation,  she shall be to me as Ariel.
I will encamp against thee round about,  will lay siege against thee with posted troops. And I will raise siege works against thee.
thou shall be brought down,  shall speak out of the ground. And thy speech shall be low out of the dust,  thy voice shall be as of he who has a familiar spirit, out of the ground. And thy speech shall whisper out of the dust.
But the multitude of thy foes shall be like small dust,  the multitude of the terrible ones as chaff that passes away. Yea, it shall be in an instant suddenly.
She shall be visited by Jehovah of hosts with thunder,  with earthquake,  great noise, with whirlwind and tempest,  the flame of a devouring fire.
the multitude of all the nations that fight against Ariel, even all that fight against her and her stronghold,  that distress her, shall be as a dream, a vision of the night.
it shall be as when a hungry man dreams, , behold, he eats. But he awakes,  his soul is empty. Or as when a thirsty man dreams, , behold, he drinks. But he awakes, , behold, he is faint,  his soul has appetite. So shall the multitude of all the nations be that fight against mount Zion.
Tarry ye and wonder, take your pleasure and be blind. They are drunken,  not with wine. They stagger,  not with strong drink.
For Jehovah has poured out upon you the spirit of deep sleep,  has closed your eyes. The prophets,  your heads, the seers, he has covered.
all vision has become to you as the words of a book that is sealed, which men deliver to a man who is learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee. And he says, I cannot, for it is sealed.
the book is delivered to him who is not learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee. And he says, I am not learned.
the Lord said, Inasmuch as this people draw near me with their mouth,  honor me with their lips,  have removed their heart far from me,  in vain they worship me, teaching the commandments and doctrines of men.
Therefore, behold, I will proceed to do a marvelous work among this people, even a marvelous work and a wonder. I will destroy the wisdom of the wise,  the understanding of their prudent men shall be hidden.
Woe to those who hide deep their counsel from Jehovah,  whose works are in the dark,  who say, Who sees us? and, Who knows us?
Ye turn things upside down! Shall the potter be esteemed as clay, that the thing made should say of him who made it, He did not make me, or the thing formed say of him who formed it, He has no understanding?
Is it not yet a very little while,  Lebanon shall be turned into a fruitful field,  the fruitful field shall be esteemed as a forest?
in that day the deaf shall hear the words of the book,  the eyes of the blind shall see out of obscurity and out of darkness.
The meek also shall increase their joy in Jehovah,  the poor among men shall rejoice in the Holy One of Israel.
For the terrible one is brought to nothing,  the scoffer ceases. And all those who watch for iniquity are cut off,
who make a man an offender in his cause,  lay a snare for him who reproves in the gate,  turn aside the just with a thing of nothing.
Therefore thus says Jehovah, who redeemed Abraham, concerning the house of Jacob: Jacob shall not now be ashamed, nor shall his face now grow pale.
But when he sees his children, the work of my hands, in the midst of him, they shall sanctify my name. Yea, they shall sanctify the Holy One of Jacob,  shall stand in awe of the God of Israel.
They also who err in spirit shall come to understanding,  those who murmur shall receive instruction.
Woe to the rebellious sons, says Jehovah, who take counsel,  not of me,  who make a league,  not of my Spirit, that they may add sin to sin,
who set out to go down into Egypt,  have not asked at my mouth, to strengthen themselves in the strength of Pharaoh,  to take refuge in the shadow of Egypt!
Therefore the strength of Pharaoh shall be your shame,  the refuge in the shadow of Egypt your confusion.
For their rulers are at Zoan,  their ambassadors have come to Hanes.
They shall all be ashamed because of a people who cannot profit them, who are not a help nor profit,  a shame,  also a reproach.
The burden of the beasts of the South. Through the land of trouble and anguish, from where come the lioness and the lion, the viper and fiery flying serpent, they carry their riches upon the shoulders of young donkeys,  their treasures upon the humps of camels, to a people who shall not profit them.
For Egypt helps in vain,  to no purpose. Therefore I have called her Rahab who sits still.
Now go, write it before them on a tablet,  inscribe it on a scroll, that it may be for the time to come forever and ever.
For it is a rebellious people, lying sons, sons who will not hear the law of Jehovah,
who say to the seers, Do not see,  to the prophets, Do not prophesy to us right things. Speak to us smooth things. Prophesy deceits.
Get you out of the way. Turn aside out of the path. Cause the Holy One of Israel to cease from before us.
Therefore thus says the Holy One of Israel, Because ye despise this word,  trust in oppression and perverseness,  rely on it,
therefore this iniquity shall be to you as a breach ready to fall, swelling out in a high wall, whose breaking comes suddenly in an instant.
he shall break it as a potter's vessel is broken, breaking it in pieces without sparing, so that there shall not be found among the pieces of it a shard with which to take fire from the hearth, or to dip up water out of the cistern.
For thus said the lord Jehovah, the Holy One of Israel, Ye shall be saved in returning and rest. Your strength shall be in quietness and in confidence. And ye would not,
but ye said, No, for we will flee upon horses. Therefore ye shall flee. And ye said, We will ride upon the swift. Therefore those who pursue you shall be swift.
One thousand shall flee at the threat of one. Ye shall flee at the threat of five, till ye are left as a beacon upon the top of a mountain,  as an ensign on a hill.
therefore Jehovah will wait, that he may be gracious to you. And therefore he will be exalted, that he may have mercy upon you, for Jehovah is a God of justice. Blessed are all those who wait for him.
For the people shall dwell in Zion at Jerusalem. Thou shall weep no more. He will surely be gracious to thee at the voice of thy cry. When he shall hear, he will answer thee.
though the Lord give you the bread of adversity and the water of affliction, yet thy teachers shall not be hidden anymore,  thine eyes shall see thy teachers.
thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying, This is the way, walk ye in it when ye turn to the right hand,  when ye turn to the left.
ye shall defile the overlaying of thy graven images of silver,  the plating of thy molten images of gold. Thou shall cast them away as an unclean thing. Thou shall say to it, Get thee away.
he will give the rain for thy seed, with which thou shall sow the ground,  bread of the increase of the ground,  it shall be fat and plenteous. In that day thy cattle shall feed in large pastures.
Likewise the oxen and the young donkeys that till the ground shall eat savory provender, which has been winnowed with the shovel and with the fork.
there shall be upon every lofty mountain,  upon every high hill, brooks and streams of waters, in the day of the great slaughter, when the towers fall.
Moreover the light of the moon shall be as the light of the sun,  the light of the sun shall be sevenfold, as the light of seven days, in the day that Jehovah binds up the hurt of his people,  heals the stroke of their wound.
Behold, the name of Jehovah comes from far, burning with his anger,  in thick rising smoke. His lips are full of indignation,  his tongue is as a devouring fire,
his breath is as an overflowing stream that reaches even to the neck, to sift the nations with the sieve of destruction. And a bridle that causes to err shall be in the jaws of the peoples.
Ye shall have a song as in the night when a holy feast is kept,  gladness of heart, as he who goes with a pipe to come to the mountain of Jehovah, to the Rock of Israel.
Jehovah will cause his glorious voice to be heard,  will show the coming down of his arm with the indignation of his anger,  the flame of a devouring fire, with a blast and tempest and hailstones.
For through the voice of Jehovah the Assyrian shall be dismayed. With his rod he will smite him.
every stroke of the appointed staff, which Jehovah shall lay upon him, shall be with the sound of tambourine and harps. And he will fight with them in battles with the brandishing of his arm.
For a Topheth is prepared of old, yea, it is made ready for the king. He has made it deep and large. The pile of it is fire and much wood. The breath of Jehovah kindles it, like a stream of brimstone.
Woe to those who go down to Egypt for help,  rely on horses,  trust in chariots because they are many,  in horsemen because they are very strong,  they look not to the Holy One of Israel, nor seek Jehovah!
Yet he also is wise,  will bring evil,  will not call back his words,  will arise against the house of the evildoers,  against the help of those who work iniquity.
Now the Egyptians are men,  not God,  their horses flesh,  not spirit. And when Jehovah shall stretch out his hand, both he who helps shall stumble,  he who is helped shall fall,  they shall all be consumed together.
For thus says Jehovah to me, As the lion and the young lion growling over his prey, even if a multitude of shepherds are called forth against him, he will not be dismayed at their voice, nor abase himself for the noise of them, so Jehovah of hosts will come down to fight upon mount Zion,  upon the hill of it.
As birds hovering, so Jehovah of hosts will protect Jerusalem. He will protect and deliver. He will pass over and preserve.
Turn ye to him from whom ye have deeply revolted, O sons of Israel.
For in that day they shall cast away every man his idols of silver,  his idols of gold, which your own hands have made to you for a sin.
the Assyrian shall fall by the sword, not of man,  the sword, not of men, shall devour him. But he shall flee from the sword,  his young men shall become subject to task work.
his rock shall pass away because of terror,  his rulers shall be dismayed at the ensign, says Jehovah, whose fire is in Zion,  his furnace in Jerusalem.
Behold, a king shall reign in righteousness,  rulers shall rule in justice.
a man shall be as a hiding-place from the wind,  a covert from the tempest, as streams of water in a dry place, as the shade of a great rock in a weary land.
the eyes of those who see shall not be dim,  the ears of those who hear shall hearken.
the heart of the rash shall understand knowledge,  the tongue of the stammerers shall be ready to speak plainly.
The fool shall no more be called noble, nor the churl said to be bountiful.
For the fool will speak folly,  his heart will work iniquity, to practice profaneness,  to utter error against Jehovah, to make empty the soul of the hungry,  to cause the drink of the thirsty to fail.
the instruments of the churl are evil. He devises wicked devices to destroy the poor with lying words, even when the needy speaks right.
But a noble man devises noble things,  in noble things he shall continue.
Rise up, ye women who are at ease. Hear my voice, ye careless daughters. Give ear to my speech.
For ye shall be troubled days beyond a year, ye careless women. For the vintage shall fail; the ingathering shall not come.
Tremble, ye women who are at ease. Be troubled, ye careless ones. Strip you,  make you bare,  gird sackcloth upon your loins.
They shall beat upon the breasts for the pleasant fields, for the fruitful vine.
Thorns and briers shall come up on the land of my people, yea, upon all the houses of joy in the joyous city.
For the palace shall be forsaken. The populous city shall be deserted. The hill and the watch-tower shall be for dens forever, a joy of wild donkeys, a pasture of flocks,
until the Spirit be poured upon us from on high,  the wilderness becomes a fruitful field,  the fruitful field be esteemed as a forest.
Then justice shall dwell in the wilderness,  righteousness shall abide in the fruitful field.
the work of righteousness shall be peace,  the effect of righteousness, quietness and confidence forever.
my people shall abide in a peaceable habitation,  in safe dwellings,  in quiet resting-places.
But it shall hail in the downfall of the forest,  the city shall be utterly laid low.
Blessed are ye who sow beside all waters, who send forth the feet of the ox and the donkey.
Woe to thee who destroys,  thou were not destroyed,  deal treacherously,  they did not deal treacherously with thee! When thou have ceased to destroy, thou shall be destroyed,  when thou have made an end of dealing treacherously, they shall deal treacherously with thee.
O Jehovah, be gracious to us, we have waited for thee. Be thou our arm every morning, also our salvation in the time of trouble.
At the noise of the tumult the peoples have fled. At the lifting up of thyself the nations are scattered.
your spoil shall be gathered as the caterpillar gathers. As locusts leap, men shall leap upon it.
Jehovah is exalted, for he dwells on high. He has filled Zion with justice and righteousness.
there shall be stability in thy times, abundance of salvation, wisdom,  knowledge. The fear of Jehovah is thy treasure.
Behold, their valiant ones cry outside. The ambassadors of peace weep bitterly.
The highways lie waste. The wayfaring man ceases. The enemy has broken the covenant. He has despised the cities. He does not regard man.
The land mourns and languishes. Lebanon is confounded and withers away. Sharon is like a desert,  Bashan and Carmel shake off their leaves.
Now I will arise, says Jehovah. Now I will lift up myself. Now I will be exalted.
Ye shall conceive chaff. Ye shall bring forth stubble. Your breath is a fire that shall devour you.
the peoples shall be as the burnings of lime, as thorns cut down that are burned in the fire.
Hear, ye who are far off, what I have done,  ye who are near, acknowledge my might.
The sinners in Zion are afraid. Trembling has seized the profane. Who among us can dwell with the devouring fire? Who among us can dwell with everlasting burnings?
He who walks righteously,  speaks uprightly. He who despises the gain of oppressions, who shakes away his hands from taking a bribe, who stops his ears from hearing of blood,  shuts his eyes from looking upon evil.
He shall dwell on high. His place of defense shall be the munitions of rocks. His bread shall be given. His waters shall be sure.
Thine eyes shall see the king in his beauty. They shall behold a land that reaches afar.
Thy heart shall muse on the terror. Where is he who counted? Where is he who weighed the tribute? Where is he who counted the towers?
Thou shall not see the fierce people, a people of a deep speech that thou cannot comprehend, of a strange tongue that thou cannot understand.
Look upon Zion, the city of our solemnities. Thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a quiet habitation, a tent that shall not be removed. The stakes of which shall never be plucked up, nor shall any of the cords of it be broken.
But Jehovah will be with us there in majesty. A place of broad rivers and streams, in which shall go no galley with oars, nor shall a gallant ship pass thereby.
For Jehovah is our judge. Jehovah is our lawgiver. Jehovah is our king, he will save us.
Thy tacklings are loosed. They could not strengthen the foot of their mast. They could not spread the sail. Then the prey of a great spoil was divided. The lame took the prey.
the inhabitant shall not say, I am sick. The people who dwell in it shall be forgiven their iniquity.
Come near, ye nations, to hear. And hearken, ye peoples. Let the earth hear,  the fullness thereof, the world,  all things that come forth from it.
For Jehovah has indignation against all the nations,  wrath against all their host. He has utterly destroyed them. He has delivered them to the slaughter.
Their slain also shall be cast out. And the stench of their dead bodies shall come up,  the mountains shall be melted with their blood.
all the host of heaven shall be dissolved,  the heavens shall be rolled together as a scroll. And all their host shall fade away as the leaf fades from off the vine,  as a fading leaf from the fig tree.
For my sword has drunk its fill in heaven. Behold, it shall come down upon Edom,  upon the people of my curse, to judgment.
The sword of Jehovah is filled with blood. It is made fat with fatness, with the blood of lambs and goats, with the fat of the kidneys of rams, for Jehovah has a sacrifice in Bozrah,  a great slaughter in the land of Edom.
the wild oxen shall come down with them,  the bullocks with the bulls. And their land shall be drunken with blood,  their dust made fat with fatness.
For Jehovah has a day of vengeance, a year of recompense for the cause of Zion.
the streams of Edom shall be turned into pitch,  the dust of it into brimstone. And the land thereof shall become burning pitch.
It shall not be quenched night nor day. The smoke of it shall go up forever. From generation to generation it shall lie waste. None shall pass through it forever and ever.
But the pelican and the porcupine shall possess it. And the owl and the raven shall dwell in it. And he will stretch over it the line of confusion,  the plummet of emptiness.
They shall call the nobles of it to the kingdom,  none shall be there. And all its rulers shall be nothing.
thorns shall come up in its palaces, nettles and thistles in the fortresses of it. And it shall be a habitation of jackals, a court for ostriches.
the wild beasts of the desert shall meet with the wolves. And the wild goat shall cry to his fellow. Yea, the screech owl shall settle there,  shall find her a place of rest.
There the dart-snake shall make her nest,  lay,  hatch,  gather under her shade. Yea, there the vultures shall be gathered, each one with her mate.
Seek ye out of the book of Jehovah,  read. No one of these shall be missing. None shall want her mate. For my mouth, it has commanded,  his Spirit, it has gathered them.
he has cast the lot for them,  his hand has divided it to them by line. They shall possess it forever. From generation to generation they shall dwell therein.
The wilderness and the dry land shall be glad. And the desert shall rejoice,  blossom as the rose.
It shall blossom abundantly,  rejoice even with joy and singing. The glory of Lebanon shall be given to it, the excellency of Carmel and Sharon. They shall see the glory of Jehovah, the excellency of our God.
Strengthen ye the weak hands,  confirm the feeble knees.
Say to those who are of a fearful heart, Be strong, fear not. Behold, your God will come with vengeance, with the recompense of God. He will come and save you.
Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened,  the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped.
Then the lame man shall leap as a hart,  the tongue of the mute shall sing. For waters in the wilderness shall break out,  streams in the desert.
the glowing sand shall become a pool,  the thirsty ground springs of water. In the habitation of jackals, where they lay, shall be grass with reeds and rushes.
a highway shall be there,  a way. And it shall be called The way of holiness. The unclean shall not pass over it,  it shall be for the redeemed, the wayfaring men. Yea fools shall not err in it.
No lion shall be there, nor shall any ravenous beast go up in it. They shall not be found there,  the redeemed shall walk there.
the ransomed of Jehovah shall return,  come with singing to Zion. And everlasting joy shall be upon their heads. They shall obtain gladness and joy. And sorrow and sighing shall flee away.
Now it came to pass in the fourteenth year of king Hezekiah, that Sennacherib king of Assyria came up against all the fortified cities of Judah,  took them.
the king of Assyria sent Rabshakeh from Lachish to Jerusalem to king Hezekiah with a great army. And he stood by the conduit of the upper pool in the highway of the fuller's field.
Then Eliakim the son of Hilkiah came forth to him, who was over the household,  Shebna the scribe,  Joah, the son of Asaph, the recorder.
Rabshakeh said to them, Say ye now to Hezekiah, Thus says the great king, the king of Assyria: What confidence is this in which thou trust?
I say, thy counsel and strength for the war are but vain words. Now on whom do thou trust that thou have rebelled against me?
Behold, thou trust upon the staff of this bruised reed, even upon Egypt, on which if a man leans, it will go into his hand,  pierce it. So is Pharaoh king of Egypt to all who trust on him.
But if thou say to me, We trust in Jehovah our God. Is that not he whose high places and whose altars Hezekiah has taken away,  has said to Judah and to Jerusalem, Ye shall worship before this altar?
Now therefore, I pray thee, give pledges to my master the king of Assyria,  I will give thee two thousand horses, if thou be able on thy part to set riders upon them.
How then can thou turn away the face of one captain of the least of my master's servants,  put thy trust on Egypt for chariots and for horsemen?
have I now come up without Jehovah against this land to destroy it? Jehovah said to me, Go up against this land,  destroy it.
Then Eliakim and Shebna and Joah said to Rabshakeh, Speak, I pray thee, to thy servants in the Syrian language, for we understand it. And speak not to us in the Jews' language, in the ears of the people who are on the wall.
But Rabshakeh said, Has my master sent me to thy master,  to thee, to speak these words,  not to the men who sit upon the wall, to eat their own dung,  to drink their own urine with you?
Then Rabshakeh stood,  cried with a loud voice in the Jews' language,  said, Hear ye the words of the great king, the king of Assyria.
Thus says the king, Let not Hezekiah deceive you, for he will not be able to deliver you.
Neither let Hezekiah make you trust in Jehovah, saying, Jehovah will surely deliver us. This city shall not be given into the hand of the king of Assyria.
Hearken not to Hezekiah. For thus says the king of Assyria, Make your peace with me,  come out to me,  eat ye everyone of his vine,  everyone of his fig tree,  drink ye everyone the waters of his own cistern,
until I come and take you away to a land like your own land, a land of grain and new wine, a land of bread and vineyards.
Beware lest Hezekiah persuade you, saying, Jehovah will deliver us. Has any of the gods of the nations delivered his land out of the hand of the king of Assyria?
Where are the gods of Hamath and Arpad? Where are the gods of Sepharvaim? And have they delivered Samaria out of my hand?
Who are they among all the gods of these countries that have delivered their country out of my hand, that Jehovah should deliver Jerusalem out of my hand?
But they held their peace,  answered him not a word. For the king's commandment was, saying, Answer him not.
Then Eliakim the son of Hilkiah came, who was over the household,  Shebna the scribe,  Joah, the son of Asaph, the recorder, to Hezekiah with their clothes torn,  told him the words of Rabshakeh.
it came to pass, when king Hezekiah heard it, that he tore his clothes,  covered himself with sackcloth,  went into the house of Jehovah.
he sent Eliakim, who was over the household,  Shebna the scribe,  the elders of the priests, covered with sackcloth, to Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz.
they said to him, Thus says Hezekiah, This day is a day of trouble,  of rebuke,  of blasphemy, for the sons have come to the birth,  there is not strength to bring forth.
It may be Jehovah thy God will hear the words of Rabshakeh, whom the king of Assyria his master has sent to defy the living God,  will rebuke the words which Jehovah thy God has heard. Therefore lift up thy prayer for the remnant that is left.
So the servants of king Hezekiah came to Isaiah.
Isaiah said to them, Thus shall ye say to your master, Thus says Jehovah: Be not afraid of the words that thou have heard, with which the servants of the king of Assyria have blasphemed me.
Behold, I will put a spirit in him,  he shall hear news,  shall return to his own land. And I will cause him to fall by the sword in his own land.
So Rabshakeh returned,  found the king of Assyria warring against Libnah, for he had heard that he was departed from Lachish.
he heard say concerning Tirhakah king of Ethiopia, He has come out to fight against thee. And when he heard it, he sent messengers to Hezekiah, saying,
Thus shall ye speak to Hezekiah king of Judah, saying, Let not thy God in whom thou trust deceive thee, saying, Jerusalem shall not be given into the hand of the king of Assyria.
Behold, thou have heard what the kings of Assyria have done to all lands, by destroying them utterly. And shall thou be delivered?
Have the gods of the nations delivered them, which my fathers have destroyed, Gozan,  Haran,  Rezeph,  the sons of Eden who were in Telassar?
Where is the king of Hamath,  the king of Arpad,  the king of the city of Sepharvaim, of Hena,  Ivvah?
Hezekiah received the letter from the hand of the messengers,  read it. And Hezekiah went up to the house of Jehovah,  spread it before Jehovah.
Hezekiah prayed to Jehovah, saying,
O Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel, who sit above the cherubim, thou are the God, even thou alone, of all the kingdoms of the earth. Thou have made heaven and earth.
Incline thine ear, O Jehovah,  hear. Open thine eyes, O Jehovah,  see,  hear all the words of Sennacherib, who has sent to defy the living God.
Of a truth, Jehovah, the kings of Assyria have laid waste all the countries,  their land,
have cast their gods into the fire. For they were no gods,  the work of men's hands, wood and stone. Therefore they have destroyed them.
Now therefore, O Jehovah our God, save us from his hand, that all the kingdoms of the earth may know that thou are Jehovah, even thou only.
Then Isaiah the son of Amoz sent to Hezekiah, saying, Thus says Jehovah, the God of Israel, Whereas thou have prayed to me against Sennacherib king of Assyria,
this is the word which Jehovah has spoken concerning him: The virgin daughter of Zion has despised thee and laughed thee to scorn. The daughter of Jerusalem has shaken her head at thee.
Whom have thou defied and blasphemed? And against whom have thou exalted thy voice and lifted up thine eyes on high? Even against the Holy One of Israel.
By thy servants thou have defied the Lord,  have said, With the multitude of my chariots I have come up to the height of the mountains, to the innermost parts of Lebanon. And I will cut down the tall cedars of it,  the choice fir trees of it,  I will enter into its farthest height, the forest of its fruitful field.
I have dug and drunk water,  with the sole of my feet I will dry up all the rivers of Egypt.
Have thou not heard how I have done it long ago,  formed it of ancient times? Now I have brought it to pass, that it should be thine to lay waste fortified cities into ruinous heaps.
Therefore their inhabitants were of small power. They were dismayed and confounded. They were as the grass of the field,  as the green herb. As the grass on the housetops,  as a field of grain before it is grown up.
But I know thy sitting down,  thy going out,  thy coming in,  thy raging against me.
Because of thy raging against me,  because thine arrogance has come up into my ears, therefore I will put my hook in thy nose,  my bridle in thy lips,  I will turn thee back by the way by which thou came.
this shall be the sign to thee. Ye shall eat this year that which grows of itself,  in the second year that which springs of the same,  in the third year sow ye,  reap,  plant vineyards,  eat the fruit of it.
the remnant that is escaped of the house of Judah shall again take root downward,  bear fruit upward.
For out of Jerusalem shall go forth a remnant,  out of mount Zion those who shall escape. The zeal of Jehovah of hosts will perform this.
Therefore thus says Jehovah concerning the king of Assyria, He shall not come to this city, nor shoot an arrow there. Neither shall he come before it with shield, nor cast up a mound against it.
By the way that he came, by the same he shall return,  he shall not come to this city, says Jehovah.
For I will defend this city to save it, for my own sake,  for my servant David's sake.
the agent of Jehovah went forth,  smote in the camp of the Assyrians a hundred and eighty-five thousand. And when men arose early in the morning, behold, these were all dead bodies.
So Sennacherib king of Assyria departed,  went and returned,  dwelt at Nineveh.
it came to pass, as he was worshiping in the house of Nisroch his god, that Adrammelech and Sharezer his sons smote him with the sword,  they escaped into the land of Ararat. And Esar-haddon his son reigned in his stead.
In those days Hezekiah was sick to death. And Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz came to him,  said to him, Thus says Jehovah, Set thy house in order, for thou shall die,  not live.
Then Hezekiah turned his face to the wall,  prayed to Jehovah,
said, Remember now, O Jehovah, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth and with a perfect heart,  have done that which is good in thy sight. And Hezekiah wept greatly.
Then the word of Jehovah came to Isaiah, saying,
Go,  say to Hezekiah, Thus says Jehovah, the God of David thy father. I have heard thy prayer. I have seen thy tears. Behold, I will add to thy days fifteen years.
I will deliver thee and this city out of the hand of the king of Assyria,  I will defend this city.
this shall be the sign to thee from Jehovah, that Jehovah will do this thing that he has spoken:
Behold, I will cause the shadow on the steps, which has gone down on the dial of Ahaz with the sun, to return backward ten steps. So the sun returned ten steps on the dial on which it had gone down.
The writing of Hezekiah king of Judah when he had been sick,  was recovered of his sickness:
I said, In the noontide of my days I shall go into the gates of Sheol. I am deprived of the residue of my years.
I said, I shall not see Jehovah, even Jehovah in the land of the living. I shall behold man no more with the inhabitants of the world.
My dwelling is removed,  is carried away from me as a shepherd's tent. I have rolled up, like a weaver, my life. He will cut me off from the loom. From day even to night thou will make an end of me.
I quieted myself until morning. As a lion, so he breaks all my bones. From day even to night will thou make an end of me.
Like a swallow or a crane, so I chattered. I moaned as a dove. My eyes fail with looking upward. O Lord, I am oppressed, be thou my surety.
What shall I say? He has both spoken to me,  himself has done it. I shall go softly all my years because of the bitterness of my soul.
O Lord, by these things men live,  wholly therein is the life of my spirit. Therefore recover thou me,  make me to live.
Behold, for peace I had great bitterness. But thou have by love for my soul delivered it from the pit of corruption. For thou have cast all my sins behind thy back.
For Sheol cannot praise thee, death cannot celebrate thee. Those who go down into the pit cannot hope for thy truth.
The living, the living, he shall praise thee, as I do this day. The father to the sons shall make known thy truth.
Jehovah is ready to save me. Therefore we will sing my songs with stringed instruments all the days of our life in the house of Jehovah.
Now Isaiah had said, Let them take a cake of figs,  lay it for a plaster upon the boil,  he shall recover.
Hezekiah also had said, What is the sign that I shall go up to the house of Jehovah?
At that time Merodach-baladan the son of Baladan, king of Babylon, sent letters and a present to Hezekiah, for he heard that he had been sick,  was recovered.
Hezekiah was glad of them,  showed them the house of his precious things, the silver,  the gold,  the spices,  the precious oil,  all the house of his armor,  all that was found in his treasures. There was nothing in his house, nor in all his dominion, that Hezekiah did not show them.
Then Isaiah the prophet came to king Hezekiah,  said to him, What did these men say? And from where did they come to thee? And Hezekiah said, They have come from a far country to me, even from Babylon.
Then he said, What have they seen in thy house? And Hezekiah answered, They have seen all that is in my house. There is nothing among my treasures that I have not shown them.
Then Isaiah said to Hezekiah, Hear the word of Jehovah of hosts:
Behold, the days are coming, when all that is in thy house,  that which thy fathers have laid up in store until this day, shall be carried to Babylon. Nothing shall be left, says Jehovah.
of thy sons who shall issue from thee, whom thou shall beget, they shall take away,  they shall be eunuchs in the palace of the king of Babylon.
Then Hezekiah said to Isaiah, The word of Jehovah which thou have spoken is good. He said moreover, For there shall be peace and truth in my days.
Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, says your God.
Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem,  cry to her, that her warfare has been completed, that her iniquity is pardoned, that she has received of Jehovah's hand double for all her sins.
The voice of a man crying out in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of Jehovah, make straight in the desert a highway for our God.
Every valley shall be exalted,  every mountain and hill shall be made low. And the crooked shall become straight,  the rough places smooth.
the glory of Jehovah shall be revealed,  all flesh shall see it together. For the mouth of Jehovah has spoken it.
The voice said, Cry. And he said, What shall I cry? All flesh is grass,  all the goodliness of it is as the flower of the field.
The grass withers, the flower fades, because the breath of Jehovah blows upon it. Surely the people is grass.
The grass withers, the flower fades,  the word of our God shall stand forever.
O thou who tell good news to Zion, get thee up on a high mountain. O thou who tell good news to Jerusalem, lift up thy voice with strength. Lift it up, be not afraid, say to the cities of Judah, Behold, your God!
Behold, the lord Jehovah will come as a mighty one,  his arm will rule for him. Behold, his reward is with him,  his recompense before him.
He will feed his flock like a shepherd. He will gather the lambs in his arm,  carry them in his bosom,  will gently lead those who have their young.
Who has measured the waters in the hollow of his hand,  meted out heaven with the span,  comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure,  weighed the mountains in scales,  the hills in a balance?
Who has known the mind of Jehovah, or being his counselor has taught him?
With whom did he take counsel. And who instructed him,  taught him in the path of justice. And taught him knowledge,  showed to him the way of understanding?
Behold, the nations are as a drop of a bucket,  are accounted as the small dust of the balance. Behold, he takes up the isles as a very little thing.
Lebanon is not sufficient to burn, nor the beasts of it sufficient for a burnt offering.
All the nations are as nothing before him. They are accounted by him as less than nothing,  vanity.
To whom then will ye liken God? Or what likeness will ye compare to him?
The image, a workman has cast it,  the goldsmith overlays it with gold,  casts for it silver chains.
He who is too impoverished for such an oblation chooses a tree that will not rot. He seeks for him a skilful workman to set up a graven image that shall not be moved.
Have ye not known? Have yet not heard? Has it not been told you from the beginning? Have ye not understood from the foundations of the earth?
It is he who sits above the circle of the earth,  the inhabitants thereof are as grasshoppers, who stretches out the heavens as a curtain,  spreads them out as a tent to dwell in,
who brings rulers to nothing, who makes the judges of the earth as vanity.
Yea, they have not been planted. Yea, they have not been sown. Yea, their stock has not taken root in the earth. Moreover he blows upon them,  they wither,  the whirlwind takes them away as stubble.
To whom then will ye liken me, that I should be equal to him? says the Holy One.
Lift up your eyes on high,  see who has created these, who brings out their host by number. He calls them all by name, by the greatness of his might. And because he is strong in power, not one is lacking.
Why do thou say, O Jacob,  speak, O Israel, My way is hid from Jehovah. And the justice due to me is passed away from my God?
Have thou not known? Have thou not heard? The everlasting God, Jehovah, the Creator of the ends of the earth, faints not, nor is weary. There is no searching of his understanding.
He gives power to the faint. And to him who has no might he increases strength.
Even the youths shall faint and be weary,  the young men shall utterly fall.
But those who wait for Jehovah shall renew their strength. They shall mount up with wings as eagles. They shall run,  not be weary. They shall walk,  not faint.
Keep silence before me, O islands,  let the peoples renew their strength. Let them come near, then let them speak. Let us come near together to judgment.
Who raised up the righteous man from the east, calls him to his foot, gives nations before him,  makes him rule over kings? He gives them as the dust to his sword, as the driven stubble to his bow.
He pursues them,  passes on safely, even by a way that he had not gone with his feet.
Who has wrought and done it, calling the generations from the beginning? I, Jehovah, the first,  with the last, I am he.
The isles have seen,  fear. The ends of the earth tremble, they draw near,  come.
They help every man his neighbor,  says to his brother, Be of good courage.
So the carpenter encourages the goldsmith, he who smoothes with the hammer, him who smites the anvil, saying of the soldering, It is good,  he fastens it with nails, that it should not be moved.
But thou, Israel, my servant, Jacob whom I have chosen, the seed of Abraham my friend,
thou whom I have taken hold of from the ends of the earth,  called from the corners thereof,  said to thee, Thou are my servant, I have chosen thee and not cast thee away.
Fear thou not, for I am with thee. Be not dismayed, for I am thy God. I will strengthen thee. Yea, I will help thee. Yea, I will uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness.
Behold, all those who are incensed against thee shall be put to shame and confounded. Those who strive with thee shall be as nothing,  shall perish.
Thou shall seek them,  shall not find them, even those who contend with thee. Those who war against thee shall be as nothing,  as a thing of naught.
For I, Jehovah thy God, will hold thy right hand, saying to thee, Fear not, I will help thee.
Fear not, thou worm Jacob,  ye men of Israel. I will help thee, says Jehovah,  thy Redeemer is the Holy One of Israel.
Behold, I have made thee as a new sharp threshing instrument having teeth. Thou shall thresh the mountains,  beat them small,  shall make the hills as chaff.
Thou shall winnow them,  the wind shall carry them away,  the whirlwind shall scatter them. And thou shall rejoice in Jehovah. Thou shall glory in the Holy One of Israel.
The poor and needy seek water,  there is none,  their tongue fails for thirst. I, Jehovah, will answer them. I, the God of Israel, will not forsake them.
I will open rivers on the bare heights,  fountains in the midst of the valleys. I will make the wilderness a pool of water,  the dry land springs of water.
I will put in the wilderness the cedar, the acacia,  the myrtle,  the oil tree. I will set in the desert the fir tree, the pine,  the box tree together,
that they may see,  know,  consider,  understand together, that the hand of Jehovah has done this,  the Holy One of Israel has created it.
Produce your case, says Jehovah. Bring forth your strong reasons, says the King of Jacob.
Let them bring forth,  declare to us what shall happen. Declare ye the former things, what they are, that we may consider them,  know the latter end of them, or show us things to come.
Declare the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know that ye are gods. Yea, do good, or do evil, that we may be dismayed,  behold it together.
Behold, ye are of nothing,  your work is of naught. An abomination is he who chooses you.
I have raised up him from the north,  he has come, him who calls upon my name from the rising of the sun. And he shall come upon rulers as upon mortar,  as the potter treads clay.
Who has declared it from the beginning, that we may know,  beforetime, that we may say, He is right? Yea, there is none who declares. Yea, there is none who shows. Yea, there is none who hears your words.
First to Zion. Behold, behold them,  I will give to Jerusalem him who brings good news.
when I look, there is no man. Even among them there is no counselor, that, when I ask of them, can answer a word.
Behold, all of them, their works are vanity and nothing. Their molten images are wind and confusion.
Behold, my servant, whom I uphold, my chosen, in whom my soul delights. I have put my Spirit upon him, he will bring forth justice to the Gentiles.
He will not cry, nor lift up his voice, nor cause it to be heard in the street.
A bruised reed he will not break,  a dimly burning wick he will not quench,  he will bring forth justice in truth.
He will not fail nor be discouraged till he has set justice in the earth. And in his name Gentiles will hope.
Thus says God, Jehovah, he who created the heavens,  stretched them forth, he who spread abroad the earth and that which comes out of it, he who gives breath to the people upon it,  spirit to those who walk in it,
I, Jehovah, have called thee in righteousness,  will hold thy hand,  will keep thee,  give thee for a covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles,
to open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners from the dungeon,  those who sit in darkness out of the prison-house.
I am Jehovah. That is my name,  I will not give my glory to another, nor my praise to graven images.
Behold, the former things have come to pass,  I declare new things. Before they spring forth I tell you of them.
Sing to Jehovah a new song,  his praise from the end of the earth, ye who go down to the sea,  all that is therein, the isles,  the inhabitants thereof.
Let the wilderness and the cities of it lift up their voice, the villages that Kedar inhabits. Let the inhabitants of Sela sing. Let them shout from the top of the mountains.
Let them give glory to Jehovah,  declare his praise in the islands.
Jehovah will go forth as a mighty man. He will stir up his zeal like a man of war. He will cry, yea, he will shout aloud. He will do mightily against his enemies.
I have for a long time held my peace. I have been still,  refrained myself. Now I will cry out like a travailing woman. I will gasp and pant together.
I will lay waste mountains and hills,  dry up all their herbs. And I will make the rivers islands,  will dry up the pools.
I will bring the blind by a way that they know not. I will lead them in paths that they know not. I will make darkness light before them,  crooked places straight. These things I will do,  I will not forsake them.
They shall be turned back, they shall be utterly put to shame, who trust in graven images, who say to molten images, Ye are our gods.
Hear, ye deaf,  look, ye blind, that ye may see.
Who is blind,  my servant, or deaf, as my messenger that I send? Who is blind as he who is at peace with me,  blind as Jehovah's servant?
Thou see many things,  thou do not observe. His ears are open,  he does not hear.
It pleased Jehovah, for his righteousness' sake, to magnify the law,  make it honorable.
But this is a people robbed and plundered. They are all of them snared in holes,  they are hid in prison-houses. They are for a prey,  none delivers, for a spoil,  none says, Restore.
Who is there among you that will give ear to this, that will hearken and hear for the time to come?
Who gave Jacob for a spoil,  Israel to the robbers? Did not Jehovah? He against whom we have sinned,  in whose ways they would not walk, nor were they obedient to his law.
Therefore he poured upon him the fierceness of his anger,  the strength of battle. And it set him on fire round about, yet he knew not. And it burned him, yet he laid it not to heart.
But now thus says Jehovah who created thee, O Jacob,  he who formed thee, O Israel: Fear not, for I have redeemed thee. I have called thee by thy name, Thou are mine.
When thou pass through the waters, I will be with thee,  through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee. When thou walk through the fire, thou shall not be burned, nor shall the flame kindle upon thee.
For I am Jehovah thy God, the Holy One of Israel, thy Savior. I have given Egypt as thy ransom, Ethiopia and Seba in thy stead.
Since thou have been precious in my sight,  honorable,  I have loved thee, therefore I will give men in thy stead,  peoples instead of thy life.
Fear not, for I am with thee. I will bring thy seed from the east,  gather thee from the west.
I will say to the north, Give up,  to the south, Keep not back. Bring my sons from far,  my daughters from the end of the earth,
everyone who is called by my name,  whom I have created for my glory, whom I have formed, yea, whom I have made.
Bring forth the blind people who have eyes,  the deaf who have ears.
Let all the nations be gathered together,  let the peoples be assembled. Who among them can declare this,  show us former things? Let them bring their witnesses that they may be justified, or let them hear,  say, It is truth.
Ye are my witnesses, says Jehovah,  my servant whom I have chosen, that ye may know and believe me,  understand that I am he. Before me there was no God formed, nor shall there be after me.
I, even I, am Jehovah,  besides me there is no savior.
I have declared,  I have saved,  I have shown,  there was no strange god among you. Therefore ye are my witnesses, says Jehovah,  I am God.
Yea, since the day was I am he,  there is none that can deliver out of my hand. I will work,  who can hinder it?
Thus says Jehovah, your Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel: For your sake I have sent to Babylon,  I will bring down all of them as fugitives, even the Chaldeans, in the ships of their rejoicing.
I am Jehovah, your Holy One, the Creator of Israel, your King.
Thus says Jehovah, who makes a way in the sea,  a path in the mighty waters,
who brings forth the chariot and horse, the army and the mighty man (they lie down together; they shall not rise; they are extinct; they are quenched as a wick):
Do not remember ye the former things, nor consider the things of old.
Behold, I will do a new thing. Now it shall spring forth. Shall ye not know it? I will even make a way in the wilderness,  rivers in the desert.
The beasts of the field shall honor me, the jackals and the ostriches, because I give waters in the wilderness,  rivers in the desert, to give drink to my people, my chosen,
the people whom I formed for myself, that they might set forth my praise.
Yet thou have not called upon me, O Jacob,  thou have been weary of me, O Israel.
Thou have not brought me from thy sheep for burnt offerings, nor have thou honored me with thy sacrifices. I have not burdened thee with offerings, nor wearied thee with frankincense.
Thou have bought me no sweet cane with money, nor have thou filled me with the fat of thy sacrifices. But thou have burdened me with thy sins. Thou have wearied me with thine iniquities.
I, even I, am he who blots out thy transgressions for my own sake,  I will not remember thy sins.
Put me in remembrance. Let us plead together. Set thou forth thy case that thou may be justified.
Thy first father sinned,  thy teachers have transgressed against me.
Therefore I will profane the rulers of the sanctuary,  I will make Jacob a curse,  Israel a reviling.
Yet now hear, O Jacob my servant,  Israel, whom I have chosen.
Thus says Jehovah who made thee,  formed thee from the womb, who will help thee: Fear not, O Jacob my servant,  thou, Jeshurun, whom I have chosen.
For I will pour water upon him who is thirsty,  streams upon the dry ground. I will pour my Spirit upon thy seed,  my blessing upon thine offspring.
they shall spring up among the grass, as willows by the watercourses.
One shall say, I am Jehovah's,  another shall call himself by the name of Jacob,  another shall subscribe with his hand to Jehovah,  surname himself by the name of Israel.
Thus says Jehovah, the King of Israel,  his Redeemer, Jehovah of hosts: I am the first,  I am the last,  besides me there is no God.
who, as I, shall call,  shall declare it,  set it in order for me, since I established the ancient people? And let them declare the things that are coming,  that shall come to pass.
Fear ye not, nor be afraid. Have I not declared to thee of old,  shown it? And ye are my witnesses. Is there a God besides me? Yea, there is no Rock. I know not any.
Those who fashion a graven image are all of them vanity. And the things that they delight in shall not profit. And their own witnesses see not, nor know, that they may be put to shame.
Who has fashioned a god, or molded an image that is profitable for nothing?
Behold, all his fellows shall be put to shame,  the workmen. They are of men. Let them all be gathered together. Let them stand up. They shall fear. They shall be put to shame together.
The smith makes an axe,  works in the coals,  fashions it with hammers,  works it with his strong arm. Yea, he is hungry,  his strength fails. He drinks no water,  is faint.
The carpenter stretches out a line. He marks it out with a pencil. He shapes it with planes. And he marks it out with the compasses,  shapes it after the figure of a man, according to the beauty of a man, to dwell in a house.
He hews down cedars for him,  takes the holm tree and the oak,  strengthens for himself one among the trees of the forest. He plants a fir tree,  the rain nourishes it.
Then it shall be for a man to burn. And he takes of it,  warms himself. Yea, he kindles it,  bakes bread. Yea, he makes a god,  worships it. He makes it a graven image,  falls down to it.
He burns part of it in the fire. With part of it he eats flesh. He roasts roast,  is satisfied. Yea, he warms himself,  says, Aha, I am warm, I have seen the fire.
the residue of it he makes a god, even his graven image. He falls down to it and worships,  prays to it,  says, Deliver me, for thou are my god.
They do not know, nor do they consider. For he has shut their eyes, that they cannot see,  their hearts, that they cannot understand.
none calls to mind, nor is there knowledge nor understanding to say, I have burned part of it in the fire. Yea, I have also baked bread upon the coals of it. I have roasted flesh and eaten it. And shall I make the residue of it an abomination? Shall I fall down to the stock of a tree?
He feeds on ashes. A deceived heart has turned him aside. And he cannot deliver his soul, nor say, Is there not a lie in my right hand?
Remember these things, O Jacob,  Israel, for thou are my servant. I have formed thee. Thou are my servant, O Israel, thou shall not be forgotten by me.
I have blotted out, as a thick cloud, thy transgressions, , as a cloud, thy sins. Return to me, for I have redeemed thee.
Sing, O ye heavens, for Jehovah has done it. Shout, ye lower parts of the earth. Break forth into singing, ye mountains, O forest,  every tree therein. For Jehovah has redeemed Jacob,  will glorify himself in Israel.
Thus says Jehovah, thy Redeemer,  he who formed thee from the womb: I am Jehovah, who makes all things, who stretches forth the heavens alone, who spreads abroad the earth (who is with me?),
who frustrates the signs of the liars,  makes diviners mad, who turns wise men backward,  makes their knowledge foolish,
who confirms the word of his servant,  performs the counsel of his messengers, who says of Jerusalem, She shall be inhabited,  of the cities of Judah, They shall be built,  I will raise up the waste places of it,
who says to the deep, Be dry,  I will dry up thy rivers,
who says of Cyrus, He is my shepherd,  shall perform all my pleasure, even saying of Jerusalem, She shall be built,  of the temple, Thy foundation shall be laid.
Thus says Jehovah to his anointed, to Cyrus, whose right hand I have held to subdue nations before him. And I will loose the loins of kings to open the doors before him. And the gates shall not be shut.
I will go before thee,  make the rough places smooth. I will break in pieces the doors of brass,  cut apart the bars of iron.
I will give thee the treasures of darkness,  hidden riches of secret places, that thou may know that it is I, Jehovah, who call thee by thy name, even the God of Israel.
For Jacob my servant's sake,  Israel my chosen, I have called thee by thy name. I have surnamed thee, though thou have not known me.
I am Jehovah,  there is none else. Besides me there is no God. I will gird thee, though thou have not known me,
that they may know from the rising of the sun,  from the west, that there is none besides me. I am Jehovah,  there is none else.
I form the light,  create darkness. I make peace,  create evil. I am Jehovah who does all these things.
Distil, ye heavens, from above,  let the skies pour down righteousness. Let the earth open that it may bring forth salvation,  let it cause righteousness to spring up together. I, Jehovah, have created it.
Woe to him who strives with his maker, a potsherd among the potsherds of the earth! Shall the clay say to him that fashions it, What are thou making? or thy work, He has no hands?
Woe to him who says to a father, What are thou begetting? or to a woman, With what are thou travailing?
Thus says Jehovah, the Holy One of Israel and his maker: Ask me of the things that are to come concerning my sons. And command ye me concerning the work of my hands.
I have made the earth,  created man upon it. I, even my hands, have stretched out the heavens,  all their host I have commanded.
I have raised him up in righteousness,  I will make straight all his ways. He shall build my city,  he shall let my exiles go free, not for price nor reward, says Jehovah of hosts.
Thus says Jehovah: The labor of Egypt,  the merchandise of Ethiopia,  the Sabeans, men of stature, shall come over to thee,  they shall be thine. They shall go after thee. In chains they shall come over,  they shall fall down to thee. They shall make supplication to thee, saying, Surely God is in thee,  there is none else, no God.
Verily thou are a God who hides thyself, O God of Israel, the Savior.
They shall be put to shame, yea, confounded, all of them. They shall go into confusion together who are makers of idols.
But Israel shall be saved by Jehovah with an everlasting salvation. Ye shall not be put to shame nor confounded world without end.
For thus says Jehovah who created the heavens, the God who formed the earth and made it, who established it and did not create it a waste, who formed it to be inhabited: I am Jehovah,  there is none else.
I have not spoken in secret, in a place of the land of darkness. I did not say to the seed of Jacob, Seek ye me in vain. I, Jehovah, speak righteousness. I declare things that are right.
Assemble yourselves and come, draw near together, ye that are escaped of the nations. They have no knowledge that carry the wood of their graven image,  pray to a god that cannot save.
Declare ye,  bring it forth. Yea, let them take counsel together. Who has shown this from ancient time? Who has declared it of old? Have not I, Jehovah? And there is no other God besides me, a just God and a Savior. There is none besides me.
Look to me,  be ye saved, all the ends of the earth, for I am God,  there is none else.
By myself I have sworn, the word has gone forth from my mouth in righteousness,  shall not return, that to me every knee shall bow, every tongue will confess to God.
Only in Jehovah, it is said of me, is righteousness and strength. Even to him men shall come,  all those who were incensed against him shall be put to shame.
In Jehovah all the seed of Israel shall be justified,  shall glory.
Bel bows down, Nebo stoops, their idols are upon the beasts,  upon the cattle. The things that ye carried about are made a load, a burden to the weary beast.
They stoop, they bow down together. They could not deliver the burden,  themselves are gone into captivity.
Hearken to me, O house of Jacob,  all the remnant of the house of Israel, who have been borne by me from their birth, who have been carried from the womb.
even to old age I am he,  even to hoar hairs I will carry you. I have made,  I will bear, yea, I will carry,  will deliver.
To whom will ye liken me,  make me equal,  compare me, that we may be alike?
Such as lavish gold out of the bag,  weigh silver in the balance, they hire a goldsmith,  he makes it a god. They fall down, yea, they worship.
They bear it upon the shoulder. They carry it,  set it in its place,  it stands. From its place it shall not remove. Yea, he may cry to it, yet it cannot answer, nor save him out of his trouble.
Remember this,  show yourselves men. Bring it again to mind, O ye transgressors.
Remember the former things of old, for I am God,  there is none else. I am God,  there is none like me,
declaring the end from the beginning,  from ancient times things that are not yet done, saying, My counsel shall stand,  I will do all my pleasure,
calling a ravenous bird from the east, the man of my counsel from a far country. Yea, I have spoken. I will also bring it to pass. I have purposed. I will also do it.
Hearken to me, ye stout-hearted, who are far from righteousness:
I bring near my righteousness. It shall not be far off. And my salvation shall not tarry,  I will place salvation in Zion for Israel my glory.
Come down,  sit in the dust, O virgin daughter of Babylon. Sit on the ground without a throne, O daughter of the Chaldeans. For thou shall no more be called tender and delicate.
Take the millstones,  grind meal. Remove thy veil, strip off the train, uncover the leg, pass through the rivers.
Thy nakedness shall be uncovered, yea, thy shame shall be seen. I will take vengeance,  will spare no man.
Our Redeemer, Jehovah of hosts is his name, the Holy One of Israel.
Sit thou silent,  get thee into darkness, O daughter of the Chaldeans, for thou shall no more be called The mistress of kingdoms.
I was angry with my people. I profaned my inheritance,  gave them into thy hand. Thou showed them no mercy. Upon the aged thou have laid thy yoke very heavily.
thou said, I shall be mistress forever, so that thou did not lay these things to thy heart, nor remembered the latter end of it.
Now therefore hear this, thou who are given to pleasures, who sit securely, who say in thy heart, I am,  there is none else besides me. I shall not sit as a widow, nor shall I know the loss of sons.
But these two things shall come to thee in a moment in one day: the loss of sons,  widowhood. In their full measure they shall come upon thee, in the multitude of thy sorceries,  the great abundance of thine enchantments.
For thou have trusted in thy wickedness. Thou have said, None sees me. Thy wisdom and thy knowledge, it has perverted thee. And thou have said in thy heart, I am,  there is none else besides me.
Therefore evil shall come upon thee. Thou shall not know the dawning of it. And mischief shall fall upon thee. Thou shall not be able to put it away. And desolation shall come upon thee suddenly, which thou know not.
Stand now with thine enchantments,  with the multitude of thy sorceries, in which thou have labored from thy youth, if so be thou shall be able to profit, if so be thou may prevail.
Thou are wearied in the multitude of thy counsels. Let now the astrologers, the star-gazers, the monthly prognosticators, stand up,  save thee from the things that shall come upon thee.
Behold, they shall be as stubble. The fire shall burn them. They shall not deliver themselves from the power of the flame. It shall not be a coal to warm at, nor a fire to sit before.
Thus shall be the things to thee, in which thou have labored. Those who have trafficked with thee from thy youth shall wander each one to his quarter. There shall be none to save thee.
Hear ye this, O house of Jacob, who are called by the name of Israel,  have come forth out of the waters of Judah, who swear by the name of Jehovah,  make mention of the God of Israel,  not in truth, nor in righteousness
for they call themselves of the holy city,  steady themselves upon the God of Israel, Jehovah of hosts is his name):
I have declared the former things from of old. Yea, they went forth out of my mouth,  I showed them. Suddenly I did them,  they came to pass.
Because I knew that thou are obstinate,  thy neck is an iron sinew,  thy brow brass,
therefore I have declared it to thee from of old. Before it came to pass I showed it to thee, lest thou should say, My idol has done them. And my graven image,  my molten image, has commanded them.
Thou have heard it, behold all this,  ye, will ye not declare it? I have shown thee new things from this time, even hidden things, which thou have not known.
They are created now,  not from of old. And thou have not heard them before this day, lest thou should say, Behold, I knew them.
Yea, thou heard not. Yea, thou knew not. Yea, from of old thine ear was not opened. For I knew that thou dealt very treacherously,  were called a transgressor from the womb.
For my name's sake I will defer my anger,  for my praise I will refrain for thee, that I not cut thee off.
Behold, I have refined thee,  not as silver. I have chosen thee in the furnace of affliction.
For my own sake, for my own sake, I will do it. For how should my name be profaned? And I will not give my glory to another.
Hearken to me, O Jacob,  Israel my called: I am he. I am the first. I also am the last.
Yea, my hand has laid the foundation of the earth,  my right hand has spread out the heavens. When I call to them, they stand up together.
Assemble yourselves, all ye,  hear: Who among them has declared these things? He whom Jehovah loves shall perform his pleasure on Babylon,  his arm, the Chaldeans.
I, even I, have spoken, yea, I have called him. I have brought him,  he shall make his way prosperous.
Come ye near to me, hear ye this: From the beginning I have not spoken in secret. From the time that it was, there I am. And now the lord Jehovah and his Spirit has sent me.
Thus says Jehovah, thy Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel: I am Jehovah thy God, who teaches thee to profit, who leads thee by the way that thou should go.
Oh that thou had hearkened to my commandments! Then thy peace would have been as a river,  thy righteousness as the waves of the sea.
Thy seed also would have been as the sand,  the offspring of thy bowels like the grains of it. His name would not be cut off nor destroyed from before me.
Go ye forth from Babylon. Flee ye from the Chaldeans. With a voice of singing declare ye, tell this, utter it even to the end of the earth. Say ye, Jehovah has redeemed his servant Jacob.
they did not thirst when he led them through the deserts. He caused the waters to flow out of the rock for them. He also split the rock,  the waters gushed out.
There is no peace, says Jehovah, to the wicked.
Listen, O isles, to me,  hearken, ye peoples from far. Jehovah has called me from the womb. From the bowels of my mother he has made mention of my name.
he has made my mouth like a sharp sword. He has hid me in the shadow of his hand,  he has made me a polished shaft. He has kept me close in his quiver.
he said to me, Thou are my servant, Israel, in whom I will be glorified.
But I said, I have labored in vain. I have spent my strength for nothing and vanity. Yet surely the justice due to me is with Jehovah,  my recompense with my God.
now says Jehovah who formed me from the womb to be his servant, to bring Jacob again to him,  that Israel be gathered to him (for I am honorable in the eyes of Jehovah,  my God has become my strength),
yea, he says, It is too light a thing that thou should be my servant to raise up the tribes of Jacob,  to restore the preserved of Israel. I will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou may be my salvation to the end of the earth.
Thus says Jehovah, the Redeemer of Israel,  his Holy One, to him whom man despises, to him whom the nation abhors, to a servant of rulers. Kings shall see and arise, rulers,  they shall worship, because of Jehovah who is faithful, even the Holy One of Israel, who has chosen thee.
Thus says Jehovah, In an acceptable time I have heard thee,  in a day of salvation I have helped thee. And I will preserve thee,  give thee for a covenant of the people, to raise up the land, to make them inherit the desolate heritages,
saying to those who are bound, Go forth; to those who are in darkness, Show yourselves. They shall feed in the ways,  their pasture shall be on all bare heights.
They shall not hunger nor thirst, neither shall the heat nor sun smite them. For he who has mercy on them will lead them. He will guide them even by springs of water.
I will make all my mountains a way,  my highways shall be exalted.
Lo, these shall come from far, , lo, these from the north and from the west,  these from the land of Sinim.
Sing, O heavens,  be joyful, O earth,  break forth into singing, O mountains. For Jehovah has comforted his people,  will have compassion upon his afflicted.
But Zion said, Jehovah has forsaken me,  the Lord has forgotten me.
Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb? Yea, these may forget, yet I will not forget thee.
Behold, I have engraved thee upon the palms of my hands. Thy walls are continually before me.
Thy sons make haste. Thy destroyers and those who made thee waste shall go forth from thee.
Lift up thine eyes round about,  behold. All these gather themselves together,  come to thee. As I live, says Jehovah, thou shall surely clothe thee with them all, as with an ornament,  gird thyself with them, like a bride.
For, as for thy waste and thy desolate places,  thy land that has been destroyed, surely now thou shall be too narrow for the inhabitants,  those who swallowed thee up shall be far away.
The sons of thy bereavement shall yet say in thine ears, The place is too narrow for me. Give a place to me that I may dwell.
Then thou shall say in thy heart, Who has begotten these for me, seeing I have been bereaved of my sons,  am solitary, an exile,  wandering to and fro? And who has brought up these? Behold, I was left alone, these, where were they?
Thus says the lord Jehovah: Behold, I will lift up my hand to the nations,  set up my ensign to the peoples. And they shall bring thy sons in their bosom,  thy daughters shall be carried upon their shoulders.
kings shall be thy nursing fathers,  their queens thy nursing mothers. They shall bow down to thee with their faces to the earth,  lick the dust of thy feet. And thou shall know that I am Jehovah,  those who wait for me shall not be put to shame.
Shall the prey be taken from the mighty, or the lawful captives be delivered?
But thus says Jehovah, Even the captives of the mighty shall be taken away,  the prey of the terrible shall be delivered. For I will contend with him who contends with thee,  I will save thy sons.
I will feed those who oppress thee with their own flesh. And they shall be drunken with their own blood, as with sweet wine. And all flesh shall know that I, Jehovah, am thy Savior and thy Redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob.
Thus says Jehovah, Where is the bill of your mother's divorcement, with which I have put her away? Or which of my creditors is it to whom I have sold you? Behold, for your iniquities ye were sold,  for your transgressions your mother was put away.
Why, when I came, was there no man? When I called, was there none to answer? Is my hand shortened at all, that it cannot redeem? Or have I no power to deliver? Behold, at my rebuke I dry up the sea. I make the rivers a wilderness. Their fish stink because there is no water,  die for thirst.
I clothe the heavens with blackness,  I make sackcloth their covering.
The lord Jehovah has given me the tongue of those who are taught, that I may know how to sustain with words him who is weary. He awakens morning by morning. He awakens my ear to hear as those who are taught.
The lord Jehovah has opened my ear,  I was not rebellious, nor turned away backward.
I gave my back to the smiters,  my cheeks to those who plucked off the hair. I did not hide my face from shame and spitting.
For the lord Jehovah will help me. Therefore I have not been confounded. Therefore I have set my face like a flint,  I know that I shall not be put to shame.
He is near who justifies me. Who will contend with me? Let us stand up together. Who is my adversary? Let him come near to me.
Behold, the lord Jehovah will help me. Who is he who shall condemn me? Behold, all they shall grow old as a garment; the moth shall eat them up.
Who is among you that fears Jehovah, who obeys the voice of his servant? He who walks in darkness,  has no light, let him trust in the name of Jehovah,  rely upon his God.
Behold, all ye who kindle a fire, who gird yourselves about with firebrands, walk ye in the flame of your fire,  among the brands that ye have kindled. This ye shall have from my hand. Ye shall lie down in sorrow.
Hearken to me, ye who follow after righteousness, ye who seek Jehovah. Look to the rock from where ye were hewn,  to the hold of the pit from where ye were dug.
Look to Abraham your father,  to Sarah who bore you. For when he was but one I called him,  I blessed him,  made him many.
For Jehovah has comforted Zion. He has comforted all her waste places,  has made her wilderness like Eden,  her desert like the garden of Jehovah. Joy and gladness shall be found therein, thanksgiving,  the voice of melody.
Attend to me, O my people,  give ear to me, O my nation. For a law shall go forth from me,  I will establish my justice for a light of the peoples.
My righteousness is near. My salvation has gone forth,  my arms shall judge the peoples. The isles shall wait for me,  on my arm they shall trust.
Lift up your eyes to the heavens,  look upon the earth beneath. For the heavens shall vanish away like smoke,  the earth shall grow old like a garment,  those who dwell in it shall die in like manner. But my salvation shall be forever,  my righteousness shall not be abolished.
Hearken to me, ye who know righteousness, the people in whose heart is my law. Fear ye not the reproach of men, nor be ye dismayed at their revilings.
For the moth shall eat them up like a garment,  the worm shall eat them like wool. But my righteousness shall be forever,  my salvation to all generations.
Awake, awake, put on strength, O arm of Jehovah. Awake, as in the days of old, the generations of ancient times. Is it not thou who cut Rahab in pieces, who pierced the monster?
Is it not thou who dried up the sea, the waters of the great deep, who made the depths of the sea a way for the redeemed to pass over?
the ransomed of Jehovah shall return,  come with singing to Zion,  everlasting joy shall be upon their heads. They shall obtain gladness and joy,  sorrow and sighing shall flee away.
I, even I, am he who comforts you. Who are thou, that thou are afraid of man who shall die,  of the son of man who shall be made as grass,
have forgotten Jehovah thy maker, who stretched forth the heavens,  laid the foundations of the earth,  fear continually all the day because of the fury of the oppressor, when he makes ready to destroy? And where is the fury of the oppressor?
The captive exile shall speedily be loosed,  he shall not die in the pit, nor shall his bread fail.
For I am Jehovah thy God, who stirs up the sea so that the waves of it roar. Jehovah of hosts is his name.
I have put my words in thy mouth,  have covered thee in the shadow of my hand, that I may plant the heavens,  lay the foundations of the earth,  say to Zion, Thou are my people.
Awake, awake, stand up, O Jerusalem, who have drunk at the hand of Jehovah the cup of his wrath. Thou have drunk the bowl of the cup of staggering,  drained it.
There is none to guide her among all the sons whom she has brought forth, nor is there any who takes her by the hand among all the sons that she has brought up.
These two things have befallen thee (Who shall bemoan thee?): Desolation and destruction,  the famine and the sword. How shall I comfort thee?
Thy sons have fainted. They lie at the head of all the streets, as an antelope in a net. They are full of the wrath of Jehovah, the rebuke of thy God.
Therefore hear now this, thou afflicted,  drunken,  not with wine.
Thus says thy lord Jehovah,  thy God who pleads the cause of his people: Behold, I have taken out of thy hand the cup of staggering, even the bowl of the cup of my wrath. Thou shall no more drink it again.
I will put it into the hand of those who afflict thee, who have said to thy soul, Bow down, that we may go over,  thou have laid thy back as the ground,  as the street, to those who go over.
Awake, awake, put on thy strength, O Zion. Put on thy beautiful garments, O Jerusalem, the holy city. For henceforth there shall no more come into thee the uncircumcised and the unclean.
Shake thyself from the dust. Arise, sit up, O Jerusalem. Loose thyself from the bonds of thy neck, O captive daughter of Zion.
For thus says Jehovah: Ye were sold for nothing,  ye shall be redeemed without money.
For thus says the lord Jehovah, My people went down at the first into Egypt to sojourn there. And the Assyrian has oppressed them without cause.
Now therefore, what do I do here, says Jehovah, seeing that my people are taken away for nothing? Those who rule over them howl, says Jehovah,  because of you my name is continually blasphemed among the Gentiles.
Therefore my people shall know my name. Therefore they shall know in that day that I am he who speaks, Behold, it is I.
How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him who brings good news, who publishes peace, who brings good news of good, who publishes salvation, who says to Zion, Thy God reigns!
The voice of thy watchmen! They lift up the voice; they sing together. For they shall see eye to eye, when Jehovah returns to Zion.
Break forth into joy, sing together, ye waste places of Jerusalem, for Jehovah has comforted his people. He has redeemed Jerusalem.
Jehovah has made bare his holy arm in the eyes of all the nations,  all the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our God.
Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out from there. Touch no unclean thing. Go ye out of the midst of her. Cleanse yourselves, ye who bear the vessels of Jehovah.
For ye shall not go out in haste, nor shall ye go by flight. For Jehovah will go before you,  the God of Israel will be your rearward.
Behold, my servant shall deal wisely. He shall be exalted and lifted up,  shall be very high.
Just as many were astonished at thee (his visage was so marred, more than any man,  his form more than the sons of men),
so shall he sprinkle many nations. Kings shall shut their mouths at him. For that which had not been told them they shall see,  that which they had not heard they shall understand.
Who has believed our report? And to whom has the arm of Jehovah been revealed?
For he grew up before him as a tender plant,  as a root out of a dry ground. He has no form nor comeliness. And when we see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him.
He was despised,  rejected by men, a man of sorrows,  acquainted with grief. And as him from whom men hide their face he was despised,  we esteemed him not.
Surely he has borne our griefs,  carried our sorrows. Yet we esteemed him stricken, smitten by God,  afflicted.
But he was wounded for our transgressions. He was bruised for our iniquities. The chastisement of our peace was upon him,  with his stripes we are healed.
All we like sheep have gone astray. We have turned every one to his own way,  Jehovah has laid on him the iniquity of us all.
He was oppressed, yet when he was afflicted he opened not his mouth. As a lamb that is led to the slaughter,  as a sheep that is mute before its shearers, so he opened not his mouth.
In his humiliation his justice was taken away. And as for his generation, who considered that he was cut off out of the land of the living for the transgression of my people, to whom the stroke was due?
they made his grave with the wicked,  with a rich man in his death. Although he had done no violence, nor was any deceit in his mouth.
Yet it pleased Jehovah to bruise him. He has put him to grief. When thou shall make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed. He shall prolong his days,  the pleasure of Jehovah shall prosper in his hand.
He shall see of the travail of his soul,  shall be satisfied. By the knowledge of himself shall my righteous servant justify many,  he shall bear their iniquities.
Therefore I will divide him a portion with the great,  he shall divide the spoil with the strong, because he poured out his soul to death,  was numbered with the transgressors. Yet he bore the sin of many,  made intercession for the transgressors.
Sing, O barren, thou who did not bear. Break forth into singing,  cry aloud, thou who did not travail with child. For more are the sons of the desolate than the sons of the married woman, says Jehovah.
Enlarge the place of thy tent,  let them stretch forth the curtains of thy habitations. Spare not. Lengthen thy cords,  strengthen thy stakes.
For thou shall spread abroad on the right hand and on the left. And thy seed shall possess the nations,  make the desolate cities to be inhabited.
Fear not, for thou shall not be ashamed. Neither be thou confounded, for thou shall not be put to shame. For thou shall forget the shame of thy youth. And the reproach of thy widowhood thou shall remember no more.
For thy maker is thy husband. Jehovah of hosts is his name. And the Holy One of Israel is thy Redeemer. He shall be called the God of the whole earth.
For Jehovah has called thee as a wife forsaken and grieved in spirit, even a wife of youth when she is cast off, says thy God.
For a small moment I have forsaken thee,  with great mercies I will gather thee.
In overflowing wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment,  with everlasting loving kindness I will have mercy on thee, says Jehovah thy Redeemer.
For this is as the waters of Noah to me. For as I have sworn that the waters of Noah shall no more go over the earth, so I have sworn that I will not be angry with thee, nor rebuke thee.
For the mountains may depart,  the hills be removed,  my loving kindness shall not depart from thee, nor shall my covenant of peace be removed, says Jehovah who has mercy on thee.
O thou afflicted, tossed with tempest,  not comforted, behold, I will set thy stones in fair colors,  lay thy foundations with sapphires.
I will make thy pinnacles of rubies,  thy gates of carbuncles,  all thy border of precious stones.
all thy sons shall be taught of Jehovah,  great shall be the peace of thy sons.
Thou shall be established in righteousness. Thou shall be far from oppression, for thou shall not fear,  from terror, for it shall not come near thee.
Behold, they may gather together,  not by me. Whoever shall gather together against thee shall fall because of thee.
Behold, I have created the smith who blows the fire of coals,  brings forth a weapon for his work. And I have created the waster to destroy.
No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper. And every tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment thou shall condemn. This is the heritage of the servants of Jehovah,  their righteousness which is of me, says Jehovah.
Ho, everyone who thirsts, come ye to the waters. And he who has no money, come ye, buy,  eat. Yea, come, buy wine and milk without money and without price.
Why do ye spend money for that which is not bread,  your labor for that which does not satisfy? Hearken diligently to me,  eat ye that which is good,  let your soul delight itself in fatness.
Incline your ear,  come to me. Hear,  your soul shall live. And I will make an everlasting covenant with you, even the faithful holy things of David.
Behold, I have given him for a witness to the peoples, a leader and commander to the peoples.
Behold, thou shall call a nation that thou do not know. And a nation that does not know thee shall run to thee because of Jehovah thy God,  for the Holy One of Israel, for he has glorified thee.
Seek ye Jehovah while he may be found. Call ye upon him while he is near.
Let the wicked man forsake his way,  the unrighteous man his thoughts. And let him return to Jehovah,  he will have mercy upon him,  to our God, for he will abundantly pardon.
For my thoughts are not your thoughts, nor are your ways my ways, says Jehovah.
For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways,  my thoughts than your thoughts.
For as the rain comes down and the snow from heaven,  returns not there,  waters the earth,  makes it bring forth and bud,  gives seed to the sower and bread to the eater,
so shall my word be that goes forth out of my mouth. It shall not return to me void,  it shall accomplish that which I please. And it shall prosper in the thing to which I sent it.
For ye shall go out with joy,  be led forth with peace. The mountains and the hills shall break forth before you into singing,  all the trees of the fields shall clap their hands.
Instead of the thorn shall come up the fir tree,  instead of the brier shall come up the myrtle tree. And it shall be to Jehovah for a name, for an everlasting sign that shall not be cut off.
Thus says Jehovah, Keep ye justice,  do righteousness. For my salvation is near to come,  my righteousness to be revealed.
Blessed is the man who does this,  the son of man who holds it fast, who keeps the sabbath from profaning it,  keeps his hand from doing any evil.
Neither let the foreigner, who has joined himself to Jehovah, speak, saying, Jehovah will surely separate me from his people, nor let the eunuch say, Behold, I am a dry tree.
For thus says Jehovah of the eunuchs who keep my sabbaths,  choose the things that please me,  hold fast my covenant:
To them I will give in my house and within my walls a memorial and a name better than of sons and of daughters. I will give them an everlasting name, that shall not be cut off.
Also the foreigners who join themselves to Jehovah, to minister to him,  to love the name of Jehovah, to be his servants, everyone who keeps the sabbath from profaning it,  holds fast my covenant,
even them I will bring to my holy mountain,  make them joyful in my house of prayer. Their burnt offerings and their sacrifices shall be accepted upon my altar, for my house shall be called a house of prayer for all peoples.
The lord Jehovah, who gathers the outcasts of Israel, says, Yet I will gather to him, besides his own who are gathered.
All ye beasts of the field, come to devour, yea, all ye beasts in the forest.
His watchmen are blind. They are all without knowledge. They are all mute dogs. They cannot bark, dreaming, lying down, loving to slumber.
Yea, the dogs are greedy; they can never have enough. And these are shepherds who cannot understand. They have all turned to their own way, each one to his gain, from every quarter.
Come ye, they say, I will fetch wine,  we will fill ourselves with strong drink. And tomorrow shall be as this day, great beyond measure.
The righteous man perishes,  no man lays it to heart. And merciful men are taken away; none considering that the righteous man is taken away from the evil.
He enters into peace. They rest in their beds, each one who walks in his uprightness.
But draw near here, ye sons of the sorceress, the seed of the adulterer and the harlot.
Against whom do ye sport yourselves, against whom ye make a wide mouth,  put out the tongue? Are ye not children of transgression, a seed of falsehood,
ye who inflame yourselves among the oaks, under every green tree, who kill the children in the valleys, under the clefts of the rocks?
Among the smooth stones of the valley is thy portion. They, they are thy lot, even to them thou have poured a drink offering; thou have offered an oblation. Shall I be appeased for these things?
Upon a high and lofty mountain thou have set thy bed. Thou also went up there to offer sacrifice.
behind the doors and the posts thou have set up thy memorial. For thou have uncovered thyself to another than me,  have gone up. Thou have enlarged thy bed,  made thee a covenant with them. Thou loved their bed where thou saw it.
thou went to the king with oil,  increased thy perfumes,  sent thine ambassadors far off,  debased thyself even to Sheol.
Thou were wearied with the length of thy way, yet thou did not say, It is in vain. Thou found a quickening of thy strength, therefore thou were not faint.
of whom have thou been afraid and in fear, that thou lie,  have not remembered me, nor laid it to thy heart? Have I not held my peace even of long time,  thou do not fear me?
I will declare thy righteousness. And as for thy works, they shall not profit thee.
When thou cry, let those whom thou have gathered deliver thee. But the wind shall take them; a breath shall carry them all away. But he who takes refuge in me shall possess the land,  shall inherit my holy mountain.
he will say, Cast ye up, cast ye up, prepare the way. Take up the stumbling-block out of the way of my people.
For thus says the high and lofty One who inhabits eternity, whose name is Holy: I dwell in the high and holy place, also with him who is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble,  to revive the heart of the contrite.
For I will not contend forever, nor will I always be angry, for the spirit would faint before me,  the souls that I have made.
For the iniquity of his covetousness I was angry,  smote him. I hid my face and was angry,  he went on backsliding in the way of his heart.
I have seen his ways,  will heal him. I will lead him also,  restore comforts to him and to his mourners.
I create the fruit of the lips. Peace, peace, to him who is far off and to him who is near, says Jehovah,  I will heal him.
But the wicked are like the troubled sea, for it cannot rest,  its waters cast up mire and dirt.
There is no peace, says my God, to the wicked.
Cry aloud, spare not. Lift up thy voice like a trumpet,  declare to my people their transgression,  to the house of Jacob their sins.
Yet they seek me daily,  delight to know my ways. As a nation that did righteousness,  forsook not the ordinance of their God, they ask of me righteous judgments; they delight to draw near to God.
Why have we fasted, they say,  thou see not? We have afflicted our soul,  thou take no knowledge. Behold, in the day of your fast ye find pleasure,  exact from all your laborers.
Behold, ye fast for strife and contention,  to smite with the fist of wickedness. Ye do not fast this day so as to make your voice to be heard on high.
Is such the fast that I have chosen, the day for a man to afflict his soul? Is it to bow down his head as a rush,  to spread sackcloth and ashes under him? Will thou call this a fast,  an acceptable day to Jehovah?
Is not this the fast that I have chosen: to loose the bonds of wickedness, to undo the bands of the yoke,  to let the oppressed go free,  that ye break every yoke?
Is it not to deal thy bread to a hungry man,  that thou bring the poor who are cast out to thy house, when thou see a naked man, that thou cover him,  that thou not hide thyself from thine own flesh?
Then thy light shall break forth as the morning,  thy healing shall spring forth speedily. And thy righteousness shall go before thee. The glory of Jehovah shall be thy rearward.
Then thou shall call,  Jehovah will answer, thou shall cry,  he will say, Here I am. If thou take the yoke away from the midst of thee, the putting forth of the finger,  speaking wickedly,
if thou draw out thy soul to a hungry man,  satisfy an afflicted soul, then thy light shall rise in darkness,  thine obscurity be as the noonday.
Jehovah will guide thee continually,  satisfy thy soul in dry places,  make strong thy bones. And thou shall be like a watered garden,  like a spring of water whose waters fail not.
those who shall be of thee shall build the old waste places. Thou shall raise up the foundations of many generations,  thou shall be called The repairer of the breach, The restorer of paths to dwell in.
If thou turn away thy foot from the sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my holy day,  call the sabbath a delight,  the holy of Jehovah honorable,  shall honor it, not doing thine own ways, nor finding thine own pleasure, nor speaking thine own words:
then thou shall delight thyself in Jehovah,  I will make thee to ride upon the high places of the earth,  I will feed thee with the heritage of Jacob thy father. For the mouth of Jehovah has spoken it.
Behold, Jehovah's hand is not shortened, that it cannot save, nor his ear heavy, that it cannot hear.
But your iniquities have separated between you and your God,  your sins have hid his face from you so that he will not hear.
For your hands are defiled with blood,  your fingers with iniquity. Your lips have spoken lies. Your tongue mutters wickedness.
No man sues in righteousness,  no man pleads in truth. They trust in vanity,  speak lies. They conceive mischief,  bring forth iniquity.
They hatch adders' eggs,  weave the spider's web. He who eats of their eggs dies,  that which is crushed breaks out into a viper.
Their webs shall not become garments, nor shall they cover themselves with their works. Their works are works of iniquity,  the act of violence is in their hands.
Their feet run to evil,  they make haste to shed innocent blood. Their thoughts are thoughts of iniquity. Desolation and destruction are in their paths.
They do not know the way of peace,  there is no justice in their goings. They have made them crooked paths. Whoever goes in it does not know peace.
Therefore justice is far from us, nor does righteousness overtake us. We look for light,  behold, darkness, for brightness,  we walk in obscurity.
We grope for the wall like the blind. Yea, we grope as those who have no eyes. We stumble at noonday as in the twilight. We are as dead men in desolate places.
We all roar like bears,  moan greatly like doves. We look for justice,  there is none, for salvation,  it is far off from us.
For our transgressions are multiplied before thee,  our sins testify against us. For our transgressions are with us,  as for our iniquities, we know them:
transgressing and denying Jehovah,  turning away from following our God, speaking oppression and revolt, conceiving and uttering from the heart words of falsehood.
justice is turned away backward,  righteousness stands afar off. For truth has fallen in the street,  uprightness cannot enter.
Yea, truth is lacking,  he who departs from evil makes himself a prey. And Jehovah saw it,  it displeased him that there was no justice.
he saw that there was no man,  wondered that there was no intercessor. Therefore his own arm brought salvation to him. And his righteousness, it upheld him.
he put on righteousness as a breastplate,  a helmet of salvation upon his head. And he put on garments of vengeance for clothing,  was clad with zeal as a mantle.
According to their deeds, accordingly he will repay, wrath to his adversaries, recompense to his enemies. He will repay recompense to the islands.
So they shall fear the name of Jehovah from the west,  his glory from the rising of the sun. For he will come as a rushing stream, which the breath of Jehovah drives.
he who redeems will come to Zion,  to those who turn from transgression in Jacob, says Jehovah.
as for me, this is my covenant with them, says Jehovah: My Spirit that is upon thee,  my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seed's seed, says Jehovah, from henceforth and forever.
Arise, shine, for thy light has come,  the glory of Jehovah has risen upon thee.
For, behold, darkness shall cover the earth,  gross darkness the peoples. But Jehovah will arise upon thee,  his glory shall be seen upon thee.
nations shall come to thy light,  kings to the brightness of thy rising.
Lift up thine eyes round about,  see. They all gather themselves together. They come to thee. Thy sons shall come from far,  thy daughters shall be carried in the arms.
Then thou shall see and be radiant,  thy heart shall thrill and be enlarged, because the abundance of the sea shall be turned to thee. The wealth of the nations shall come to thee.
The multitude of camels shall cover thee. The dromedaries of Midian and Ephah, all those from Sheba shall come. They shall bring gold and frankincense,  shall proclaim the praises of Jehovah.
All the flocks of Kedar shall be gathered together to thee. The rams of Nebaioth shall minister to thee. They shall come up with acceptance on my altar,  I will glorify the house of my glory.
Who are these that fly as a cloud,  as the doves to their windows?
Surely the isles shall wait for me,  the ships of Tarshish first, to bring thy sons from far, their silver and their gold with them, for the name of Jehovah thy God,  for the Holy One of Israel, because he has glorified thee.
foreigners shall build up thy walls,  their kings shall minister to thee. For in my wrath I smote thee,  in my favor I have had mercy on thee.
Thy gates also shall be open continually. They shall not be shut day nor night, that men may bring to thee the wealth of the nations,  their kings led captive.
For that nation and kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish. Yea, those nations shall be utterly wasted.
The glory of Lebanon shall come to thee, the fir tree, the pine,  the box tree together, to beautify the place of my sanctuary. And I will make the place of my feet glorious.
the sons of those who afflicted thee shall come bending to thee. And all those who despised thee shall bow themselves down at the soles of thy feet. And they shall call thee The city of Jehovah, The Zion of the Holy One of Israel.
Whereas thou have been forsaken and hated, so that no man passed through thee, I will make thee an eternal excellency, a joy of many generations.
Thou shall also suck the milk of the nations,  shall suck the breast of kings. And thou shall know that I, Jehovah, am thy Savior,  thy Redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob.
For brass I will bring gold,  for iron I will bring silver,  for wood brass,  for stones iron. I will also make thy officers peace,  thine overseers righteousness.
Violence shall no more be heard in thy land, desolation nor destruction within thy borders,  thou shall call thy walls Salvation,  thy gates Praise.
The sun shall no more be thy light by day, nor for brightness shall the moon give light to thee,  Jehovah will be to thee an everlasting light,  thy God thy glory.
Thy sun shall no more go down, nor shall thy moon withdraw itself, for Jehovah will be thine everlasting light. And the days of thy mourning shall be ended.
Thy people also shall all be righteous. They shall inherit the land forever, the branch of my planting, the work of my hands, that I may be glorified.
The little one shall become a thousand,  the small one a strong nation. I, Jehovah, will hasten it in its time.
The Spirit of the lord Jehovah is upon me, because Jehovah has anointed me to preach good news to the poor. He has sent me to heal the broken-hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives,  recovering of sight to the blind,  the opening of bonds to those who are bound,
to proclaim the acceptable year of Jehovah,  the day of vengeance of our God, to comfort all who mourn,
to appoint to those who mourn in Zion, to give to them a garland for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness, that they may be called trees of righteousness, the planting of Jehovah, that he may be glorified.
they shall build the old wastes. They shall raise up the former desolations,  they shall repair the waste cities, the desolations of many generations.
strangers shall stand and feed your flocks,  foreigners shall be your plowmen and your vinedressers.
But ye shall be named the priests of Jehovah. Men shall call you the ministers of our God. Ye shall eat the wealth of the nations,  in their glory ye shall boast yourselves.
Instead of your shame ye shall have double,  instead of dishonor they shall rejoice in their portion. Therefore in their land they shall possess double. Everlasting joy shall be to them.
For I, Jehovah, love justice. I hate robbery with iniquity. And I will give them their recompense in truth. And I will make an everlasting covenant with them.
their seed shall be known among the nations,  their offspring among the peoples. All who see them shall acknowledge them, that they are the seed which Jehovah has blessed.
I will greatly rejoice in Jehovah. My soul shall be joyful in my God, for he has clothed me with the garments of salvation. He has covered me with the robe of righteousness, as a bridegroom decks himself with a garland,  as a bride adorns herself with her jewels.
For as the earth brings forth its bud,  as the garden causes the things that are sown in it to spring forth, so the lord Jehovah will cause righteousness and praise to spring forth before all the nations.
For Zion's sake I will not hold my peace,  for Jerusalem's sake I will not rest, until her righteousness goes forth as brightness,  her salvation as a lamp that burns.
the nations shall see thy righteousness,  all kings thy glory. And thou shall be called by a new name, which the mouth of Jehovah shall name.
Thou shall also be a crown of beauty in the hand of Jehovah,  a royal diadem in the hand of thy God.
Thou shall no more be termed Forsaken, nor shall thy land any more be termed Desolate. But thou shall be called Hephzi-bah,  thy land Beulah, for Jehovah delights in thee,  thy land shall be married.
For as a young man marries a virgin, so shall thy sons marry thee. And as the bridegroom rejoices over the bride, so shall thy God rejoice over thee.
I have set watchmen upon thy walls, O Jerusalem. They shall never keep silent day nor night. Ye who are Jehovah's reminders, take ye no rest,
give him no rest, till he establishes,  till he makes Jerusalem a praise in the earth.
Jehovah has sworn by his right hand,  by the arm of his strength, Surely I will no more give thy grain to be food for thine enemies,  foreigners shall not drink thy new wine, for which thou have labored.
But those who have garnered it shall eat it,  praise Jehovah. And those who have gathered it shall drink it in the courts of my sanctuary.
Go through, go through the gates. Prepare ye the way of the people. Cast up, cast up the highway. Gather out the stones. Lift up an ensign for the peoples.
Behold, Jehovah has proclaimed to the end of the earth, Say ye to the daughter of Zion, Behold, thy salvation comes. Behold, his reward is with him,  his recompense before him.
they shall call them The holy people, The redeemed of Jehovah. And thou shall be called Sought out, A city not forsaken.
Who is this who comes from Edom, with dyed garments from Bozrah, this who is glorious in his apparel, marching in the greatness of his strength? I who speak in righteousness, mighty to save.
Why are thou red in thine apparel,  thy garments like him who treads in the wine vat?
I have trodden the winepress alone,  of the peoples there was no man with me. Yea, I trod them in my anger,  trampled them in my wrath,  their lifeblood is sprinkled upon my garments,  I have stained all my raiment.
For the day of vengeance was in my heart,  the year of my redeemed has come.
I looked,  there was none to help. And I wondered that there was none to uphold. Therefore my own arm brought salvation to me. And my wrath, it upheld me.
I trod down the peoples in my anger,  made them drunk in my wrath,  I poured out their lifeblood on the earth.
I will make mention of the loving kindnesses of Jehovah,  the praises of Jehovah, according to all that Jehovah has bestowed on us,  the great goodness toward the house of Israel, which he has bestowed on them according to his mercies,  according to the multitude of his loving kindnesses.
For he said, Surely, they are my people, sons that will not deal falsely. So he was their Savior.
In all their affliction he was afflicted,  the agent of his presence saved them. In his love and in his pity he redeemed them. And he bore them,  carried them all the days of old.
But they rebelled,  grieved his holy Spirit. Therefore he was turned to be their enemy,  himself fought against them.
Then he remembered the days of old, Moses and his people, saying, Where is he who brought them up out of the sea with the shepherds of his flock? Where is he who put his holy Spirit in the midst of them,
who caused his glorious arm to go at the right hand of Moses, who divided the waters before them, to make himself an everlasting name,
who led them through the depths, as a horse in the wilderness, so that they stumbled not?
As the cattle that go down into the valley, the Spirit of Jehovah caused them to rest. So thou led thy people to make thyself a glorious name.
Look down from heaven,  behold from the habitation of thy holiness and of thy glory. Where are thy zeal and thy mighty acts? The yearning of thy heart and thy compassions are restrained toward me.
For thou are our Father, though Abraham knows us not,  Israel does not acknowledge us, thou, O Jehovah, are our Father, our Redeemer, from everlasting is thy name.
O Jehovah, why do thou make us to err from thy ways,  harden our heart from thy fear? Return for thy servants' sake, the tribes of thine inheritance.
Thy holy people possessed it but a little while. Our adversaries have trodden down thy sanctuary.
We have become as those over whom thou never bore rule, as those who were not called by thy name.
Oh that thou would rend the heavens, that thou would come down, that the mountains might quake at thy presence,
as when fire kindles the brushwood,  the fire causes the waters to boil, to make thy name known to thine adversaries, that the nations may tremble at thy presence!
When thou did fearful things which we did not look for, thou came down; the mountains quaked at thy presence.
For from of old men have not heard, nor perceived by the ear, neither has the eye seen, O God, besides thee, what he has prepared for him who waits for him.
Thou meet him who rejoices and works righteousness, those who remember thee in thy ways. Behold, thou were angry,  we sinned. Therefore we have erred.
For we have all become as unclean,  all our righteous acts are as a polluted garment. And we all fade as a leaf. And our iniquities, like the wind, take us away.
there is none who calls upon thy name, who stirs himself up to take hold of thee. For thou have hid thy face from us,  have consumed us through our iniquities.
But now, O Jehovah, thou are our Father. We are the clay,  thou our potter,  we are all the work of thy hand.
Be not angry very severely, O Jehovah, nor remember iniquity forever. Behold, look, we beseech thee, we are all thy people.
Thy holy cities have become a wilderness. Zion has become a wilderness, Jerusalem a desolation.
Our holy and our beautiful house, where our fathers praised thee, is burned with fire,  all our pleasant places are laid waste.
Will thou restrain thyself for these things, O Jehovah? Will thou hold thy peace,  afflict us very severely?
I was manifested by those who did not ask for me. I am found by those who did not seek me. I said, Behold me, behold me, to a nation that was not called by my name.
I have spread out my hands all the day to a disobedient and rebellious people, who walk in a way that is not good, according to their own thoughts,
a people who provoke me to my face continually, sacrificing in gardens,  burning incense upon bricks,
who sit among the graves,  lodge in the secret places, who eat swine's flesh,  broth of abominable things is in their vessels,
who say, Stand by thyself, do not come near to me, for I am holier than thou. These are a smoke in my nose, a fire that burns all the day.
Behold, it is written before me. I will not keep silence,  will recompense. Yea, I will recompense into their bosom
your own iniquities,  the iniquities of your fathers together, says Jehovah, those who have burned incense upon the mountains,  blasphemed me upon the hills. Therefore I will measure their former work into their bosom.
Thus says Jehovah, As the new wine is found in the cluster,  a man says, Destroy it not, for a blessing is in it, so I will do for my servants' sake, that I may not destroy them all.
I will bring forth a seed out of Jacob,  out of Judah an inheritor of my mountains. And my chosen shall inherit it,  my servants shall dwell there.
Sharon shall be a fold of flocks,  the valley of Achor a place for herds to lie down in, for my people who have sought me.
But ye who forsake Jehovah, who forget my holy mountain, who prepare a table for Fortune,  who fill up mingled wine to Destiny,
I will destine you to the sword,  ye shall all bow down to the slaughter. Because when I called, ye did not answer, when I spoke, ye did not hear,  ye did that which was evil in my eyes,  chose that in which I did not delight.
Therefore thus says the lord Jehovah, Behold, my servants shall eat,  ye shall be hungry. Behold, my servants shall drink,  ye shall be thirsty. Behold, my servants shall rejoice,  ye shall be put to shame.
Behold, my servants shall sing for joy of heart,  ye shall cry for sorrow of heart,  shall wail for vexation of spirit.
ye shall leave your name for a curse to my chosen,  the lord Jehovah will kill thee. And he will call his servants by another name,
so that he who blesses himself in the earth shall bless himself in the God of truth,  he who swears in the earth shall swear by the God of truth. Because the former troubles are forgotten,  because they are hid from my eyes.
For, behold, I create new heavens and a new earth,  the former things shall not be remembered, nor come into mind.
But be ye glad and rejoice forever in that which I create. For, behold, I create Jerusalem a rejoicing,  her people a joy.
I will rejoice in Jerusalem,  joy in my people. And there shall no more be heard in her the voice of weeping and the voice of crying.
There shall be no more from there an infant of days, nor an old man who has not filled his days. For the child shall die a hundred years old,  the sinner being a hundred years old shall be accursed.
they shall build houses,  inhabit them. And they shall plant vineyards,  eat the fruit of them.
They shall not build,  another inhabit. They shall not plant,  another eat. For as the days of a tree shall be the days of my people,  my chosen shall long enjoy the work of their hands.
They shall not labor in vain, nor bring forth for calamity. For they are the seed of the blessed of Jehovah,  their offspring with them.
it shall come to pass that, before they call, I will answer,  while they are yet speaking, I will hear.
The wolf and the lamb shall feed together,  the lion shall eat straw like the ox,  dust shall be the serpent's food. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain, says Jehovah.
Thus says Jehovah, Heaven is my throne,  the earth is my footstool. What manner of house will ye build to me,  what place shall be my rest?
For all these things my hand has made,  all these things came to be, says Jehovah. But to this man I will look, even to him who is poor and of a contrite spirit,  who trembles at my word.
He who slaughters an ox is as he who kills a man. He who sacrifices a lamb, as he who breaks a dog's neck. He who offers an oblation, as swine's blood. He who burns frankincense, as he who blesses an idol. Yea, they have chosen their own ways,  their soul delights in their abominations.
I also will choose their delusions,  will bring their fears upon them. Because when I called, none answered. When I spoke, they did not hear. But they did that which was evil in my eyes,  chose that in which I did not delight.
Hear the word of Jehovah, ye who tremble at his word: Your brothers who hate you, who cast you out for my name's sake, have said, Let Jehovah be glorified, that we may see your joy. But it is those who shall be put to shame.
A voice of tumult from the city, a voice from the temple, a voice of Jehovah who renders recompense to his enemies.
Before she travailed, she brought forth. Before her pain came, she was delivered of a man-child.
Who has heard such a thing? Who has seen such things? Shall a land be born in one day? Shall a nation be brought forth at once? For as soon as Zion travailed, she brought forth her sons.
Shall I bring to the birth,  not cause to bring forth? says Jehovah. Shall I who cause to bring forth shut the womb? says thy God.
Rejoice ye with Jerusalem,  be glad for her, all ye who love her. Rejoice for joy with her, all ye who mourn over her,
that ye may nurse and be satisfied with the breasts of her consolations, that ye may get milk out,  be delighted with the abundance of her glory.
For thus says Jehovah, Behold, I will extend peace to her like a river,  the glory of the nations like an overflowing stream. And ye shall nurse thereof. Ye shall be borne upon the side,  shall be dandled upon the knees.
As one whom his mother comforts, so I will comfort you,  ye shall be comforted in Jerusalem.
ye shall see,  your heart shall rejoice,  your bones shall flourish like the tender grass. And the hand of Jehovah shall be known toward his servants,  he will have indignation against his enemies.
For, behold, Jehovah will come with fire,  his chariots shall be like the whirlwind, to render his anger with fierceness,  his rebuke with flames of fire.
For by fire Jehovah will execute judgment,  by his sword, upon all flesh,  the slain of Jehovah shall be many.
Those who sanctify themselves and purify themselves to go to the gardens, behind one in the midst, eating swine's flesh,  the abomination,  the mouse, they shall come to an end together, says Jehovah.
For I know their works and their thoughts. The time comes, that I will gather all nations and tongues,  they shall come,  shall see my glory.
I will set a sign among them,  I will send such as escape of them to the nations, to Tarshish, Pul,  Lud, that draw the bow, to Tubal and Javan, to the isles afar off, who have not heard my fame, nor have seen my glory,  they shall declare my glory among the nations.
they shall bring all your brothers out of all the nations for an oblation to Jehovah, upon horses,  in chariots,  in litters,  upon mules,  upon dromedaries, to my holy mountain Jerusalem, says Jehovah, as the sons of Israel bring their oblation in a clean vessel into the house of Jehovah.
of them also I will take for priests and for Levites, says Jehovah.
For as the new heavens and the new earth, which I will make, shall remain before me, says Jehovah, so shall your seed and your name remain.
it shall come to pass, that from one new moon to another,  from one sabbath to another, all flesh shall come to worship before me, says Jehovah.
they shall go forth,  look upon the dead bodies of the men who have transgressed against me. For their worm shall not die, nor shall their fire be quenched,  they shall be an abhorring to all flesh.
Jeremiah
The words of Jeremiah the son of Hilkiah, of the priests who were in Anathoth in the land of Benjamin,
to whom the word of Jehovah came in the days of Josiah the son of Amon, king of Judah, in the thirteenth year of his reign.
It came also in the days of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah, to the end of the eleventh year of Zedekiah, the son of Josiah, king of Judah, to the carrying away captive of Jerusalem in the fifth month.
Now the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee,  before thou came forth out of the womb I sanctified thee. I have appointed thee a prophet to the nations.
Then I said, Ah, lord Jehovah! Behold, I know not how to speak, for I am a child.
But Jehovah said to me, Say not, I am a child. For to whomever I shall send thee thou shall go,  whatever I shall command thee thou shall speak.
Be not afraid because of them, for I am with thee to deliver thee, says Jehovah.
Then Jehovah put forth his hand,  touched my mouth. And Jehovah said to me, Behold, I have put my words in thy mouth.
See, I have this day set thee over the nations and over the kingdoms, to pluck up and to break down and to destroy and to overthrow, to build and to plant.
Moreover the word of Jehovah came to me, saying, Jeremiah, what do thou see? And I said, I see a rod of an almond tree.
Then Jehovah said to me, Thou have well seen. For I watch over my word to perform it.
the word of Jehovah came to me the second time, saying, What do thou see? And I said, I see a boiling caldron,  the face of it is from the north.
Then Jehovah said to me, Out of the north evil shall break forth upon all the inhabitants of the land.
For, lo, I will call all the families of the kingdoms of the north, says Jehovah. And they shall come,  they shall set every one his throne at the entrance of the gates of Jerusalem,  against all the walls of it round about,  against all the cities of Judah.
I will utter my judgments against them concerning all their wickedness, in that they have forsaken me,  have burned incense to other gods,  worshiped the works of their own hands.
Thou therefore gird up thy loins,  arise,  speak to them all that I command thee. Be not dismayed at them, lest I dismay thee before them.
For, behold, I have made thee this day a fortified city,  an iron pillar,  brazen walls, against the whole land, against the kings of Judah, against the rulers of it, against the priests of it,  against the people of the land.
they shall fight against thee. But they shall not prevail against thee, for I am with thee, says Jehovah, to deliver thee.
the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Go and cry in the ears of Jerusalem, saying, Thus says Jehovah, I remember for thee the kindness of thy youth, the love of thine espousals, how thou went after me in the wilderness, in a land that was not sown.
Israel was holiness to Jehovah, the first-fruits of his increase. All who devour him shall be held guilty. Evil shall come upon them, says Jehovah.
Hear ye the word of Jehovah, O house of Jacob,  all the families of the house of Israel.
Thus says Jehovah: What unrighteousness have your fathers found in me, that they have gone far from me,  have walked after vanity,  have become vain?
Nor did they say, Where is Jehovah who brought us up out of the land of Egypt, who led us through the wilderness, through a land of deserts and of pits, through a land of drought and of the shadow of death, through a land that none passed through,  where no man dwelt?
I brought you into a plentiful land, to eat the fruit of it and the goodness of it. But when ye entered, ye defiled my land,  made my heritage an abomination.
The priests did not say, Where is Jehovah? And those who handle the law did not know me. The rulers also transgressed against me. And the prophets prophesied by Baal,  walked after things that do not profit.
Therefore I will yet contend with you, says Jehovah,  I will contend with your son's sons.
For pass over to the isles of Kittim,  see,  send to Kedar,  consider diligently,  see if there has been such a thing.
Has a nation changed its gods, which yet are no gods? But my people have changed their glory for that which does not profit.
Be astonished, O ye heavens, at this,  be horribly afraid. Be ye very desolate, says Jehovah.
For my people have committed two evils: They have forsaken me, the fountain of living waters,  hewed them out cisterns, broken cisterns, that can hold no water.
Is Israel a servant? Is he a homebred one? Why has he become a prey?
The young lions have roared upon him,  yelled,  they have made his land waste. His cities are burned up, without inhabitant.
The sons also of Memphis and Tahpanhes have broken the crown of thy head.
Have thou not procured this to thyself, in that thou have forsaken Jehovah thy God when he led thee by the way?
now what have thou to do in the way to Egypt, to drink the waters of the Shihor? Or what have thou to do in the way to Assyria, to drink the waters of the River?
Thine own wickedness shall correct thee,  thy backslidings shall reprove thee. Know therefore and see that it is an evil thing and a bitter, that thou have forsaken Jehovah thy God,  that my fear is not in thee, says the Lord, Jehovah of hosts.
For from old time I have broken thy yoke,  burst thy bonds. And thou said, I will not serve, for upon every high hill and under every green tree thou bowed thyself, playing the harlot.
Yet I had planted thee a noble vine, wholly a right seed. How then have thou turned into the degenerate branches of a foreign vine to me?
For though thou wash thee with lye,  take thee much soap, yet thine iniquity is marked before me, says the lord Jehovah.
How can thou say, I am not defiled; I have not gone after the Baalim? See thy way in the valley. Know what thou have done, a swift dromedary traversing her ways,
a wild donkey used to the wilderness, that sniffs up the wind in her desire. In her time of estrus who can turn her away? All those who seek her will not weary themselves. In her month they shall find her.
Withhold thy foot from being unshod,  thy throat from thirst. But thou said, It is in vain. No, for I have loved strangers,  after them I will go.
As the thief is shamed when he is found, so is the house of Israel shamed, they, their kings, their rulers,  their priests,  their prophets,
who say to a block of wood, Thou are my father,  to a stone, Thou have brought me forth. For they have turned their back to me,  not their face. But in the time of their trouble they will say, Arise,  save us.
But where are thy gods that thou have made thee? Let them arise, if they can save thee in the time of thy trouble. For according to the number of thy cities are thy gods, O Judah.
Why will ye contend with me? Ye have all transgressed against me, says Jehovah.
In vain I have smitten your sons. They received no correction. Your own sword has devoured your prophets like a destroying lion.
O generation, see ye the word of Jehovah. Have I been a wilderness to Israel, or a land of thick darkness? Why do my people say, We have broken loose. We will come no more to thee?
Can a virgin forget her ornaments, or a bride her attire? Yet my people have forgotten me days without number.
How thou trim thy way to seek love! Therefore even the wicked women thou have taught thy ways.
Also in thy skirts is found the blood of the souls of the innocent poor. Thou did not find them breaking in. But it is because of all these things.
Yet thou said, I am innocent. Surely his anger is turned away from me. Behold, I will enter into judgment with thee because thou say, I have not sinned.
Why do thou gad about so much to change thy way? Thou shall be ashamed of Egypt also, as thou were ashamed of Assyria.
Thou shall also go forth from there with thy hands upon thy head. For Jehovah has rejected those in whom thou trust. And thou shall not prosper with them.
They say, If a man puts away his wife,  she goes from him,  become another man's, will he return to her again? Will not that land be greatly polluted? But thou have played the harlot with many lovers. Yet return again to me, says Jehovah.
Lift up thine eyes to the bare heights,  see. Where have thou not been lain with? By the ways thou have sat for them, as an Arabian in the wilderness,  thou have polluted the land with thy whoredoms and with thy wickedness.
Therefore the showers have been withheld,  there has been no latter rain. Yet thou have a harlot's forehead; thou refused to be ashamed.
Will thou not from this time cry to me, My Father, thou are the guide of my youth?
Will he retain his anger forever? Will he keep it to the end? Behold, thou have spoken,  have done evil things,  have had thy way.
Moreover Jehovah said to me in the days of Josiah the king, Have thou seen that which backsliding Israel has done? She has gone up upon every high mountain and under every green tree,  there has played the harlot.
I said after she had done all these things, She will return to me,  she returned not. And her treacherous sister Judah saw it.
I saw, when, for this very cause that backsliding Israel had committed adultery, I had put her away and given her a bill of divorcement, yet treacherous Judah her sister feared not,  she also went and played the harlot.
it came to pass through the frivolity of her whoredom, that the land was polluted,  she committed adultery with stones and with stocks.
yet for all this her treacherous sister Judah has not returned to me with her whole heart,  in pretense, says Jehovah.
Jehovah said to me, Backsliding Israel has shown herself more righteous than treacherous Judah.
Go,  proclaim these words toward the north,  say, Return, thou backsliding Israel, says Jehovah, I will not look in anger upon you, for I am merciful, says Jehovah. I will not keep anger forever.
Only acknowledge thine iniquity, that thou have transgressed against Jehovah thy God,  have scattered thy ways to the strangers under every green tree,  ye have not obeyed my voice, says Jehovah.
Return, O backsliding sons, says Jehovah, for I am a husband to you. And I will take you, one of a city,  two of a family,  I will bring you to Zion.
I will give you shepherds according to my heart, who shall feed you with knowledge and understanding.
it shall come to pass, when ye are multiplied and increased in the land, in those days, says Jehovah, they shall no more say, The ark of the covenant of Jehovah, nor shall it come to mind. Neither shall they remember it, nor shall they miss it. Neither shall it be made any more.
At that time they shall call Jerusalem the throne of Jehovah,  all the nations shall be gathered to it, to the name of Jehovah, to Jerusalem. Neither shall they walk any more after the stubbornness of their evil heart.
In those days the house of Judah shall walk with the house of Israel,  they shall come together out of the land of the north to the land that I gave for an inheritance to your fathers.
But I said, How I will put thee among the sons,  give thee a pleasant land, a goodly heritage of the hosts of the nations! And I said, Ye shall call me My Father,  shall not turn away from following me.
Surely as a wife treacherously departs from her husband, so ye have dealt treacherously with me, O house of Israel, says Jehovah.
A voice is heard upon the bare heights, the weeping and the supplications of the sons of Israel, because they have perverted their way; they have forgotten Jehovah their God.
Return, ye backsliding sons, I will heal your backslidings. Behold, we have come to thee, for thou are Jehovah our God.
Truly it is in vain from the heights, the multitude on the mountains. Truly in Jehovah our God is the salvation of Israel.
But the shameful thing has devoured the labor of our fathers from our youth, their flocks and their herds, their sons and their daughters.
Let us lie down in our shame,  let our confusion cover us, for we have sinned against Jehovah our God, we and our fathers, from our youth even to this day,  we have not obeyed the voice of Jehovah our God.
If thou will return, O Israel, says Jehovah, if thou will return to me,  if thou will put away thine abominations out of my sight, then thou shall not be removed.
thou shall swear, As Jehovah lives, in truth, in justice,  in righteousness. And the nations shall bless themselves in him,  in him they shall glory.
For thus says Jehovah to the men of Judah and to Jerusalem, Break up your fallow ground,  sow not among thorns.
Circumcise yourselves to Jehovah,  take away the foreskins of your heart, ye men of Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem, lest my wrath go forth like fire,  burn so that none can quench it, because of the evil of your doings.
Declare ye in Judah,  publish in Jerusalem,  say, Blow ye the trumpet in the land. Cry aloud and say, Assemble yourselves,  let us go into the fortified cities.
Set up a standard toward Zion. Flee for safety, do not stay. For I will bring evil from the north,  a great destruction.
A lion has gone up from his thicket,  a destroyer of nations. He is on his way, he has gone forth from his place, to make thy land desolate, that thy cities be laid waste, without inhabitant.
For this gird you with sackcloth, lament and wail, for the fierce anger of Jehovah is not turned back from us.
it shall come to pass at that day, says Jehovah, that the heart of the king shall perish,  the heart of the rulers,  the priests shall be astonished,  the prophets shall wonder.
Then I said, Ah, lord Jehovah! Surely thou have greatly deceived this people and Jerusalem, saying, Ye shall have peace, whereas the sword reaches to the life.
At that time it shall be said to this people and to Jerusalem, A hot wind from the bare heights in the wilderness toward the daughter of my people, not to winnow, nor to cleanse,
a full wind from these shall come for me. Now I will also utter judgments against them.
Behold, he shall come up as clouds,  his chariots as the whirlwind. His horses are swifter than eagles. Woe to us! For we are ruined.
O Jerusalem, wash thy heart from wickedness, that thou may be saved. How long shall thine evil thoughts lodge within thee?
For a voice declares from Dan,  publishes evil from the hills of Ephraim:
Make ye mention to the nations. Behold, publish against Jerusalem, that watchers come from a far country,  give out their voice against the cities of Judah.
They are as keepers of a field against her round about, because she has been rebellious against me, says Jehovah.
Thy way and thy doings have procured these things to thee. This is thy wickedness, for it is bitter, for it reaches to thy heart.
My anguish, my anguish! I am pained at my very heart. My heart is disquieted in me. I cannot hold my peace, because thou have heard, O my soul, the sound of the trumpet, the alarm of war.
Destruction upon destruction is cried, for the whole land is laid waste. Suddenly my tents are destroyed,  my curtains in a moment.
How long shall I see the standard,  hear the sound of the trumpet?
For my people are foolish. They do not know me. They are sottish sons,  they have no understanding. They are wise to do evil,  to do good they have no knowledge.
I beheld the earth, , lo, it was waste and void,  the heavens,  they had no light.
I beheld the mountains, , lo, they trembled,  all the hills moved to and fro.
I beheld, , lo, there was no man,  all the birds of the heavens were fled.
I beheld, , lo, the fruitful field was a wilderness,  all the cities thereof were broken down at the presence of Jehovah,  before his fierce anger.
For thus says Jehovah: The whole land shall be a desolation, yet I will not make a full end.
For this the earth shall mourn,  the heavens above be black, because I have spoken it, I have purposed it,  I have not relented, nor will I turn back from it.
Every city flees for the noise of the horsemen and bowmen. They go into the thickets,  climb up upon the rocks. Every city is forsaken,  not a man dwells in it.
thou, when thou are made desolate, what will thou do? Though thou clothe thyself with scarlet, though thou deck thee with ornaments of gold, though thou enlarge thine eyes with paint, in vain thou make thyself fair. Thy lovers despise thee, they seek thy life.
For I have heard a voice as of a woman in travail, the anguish as of her who brings forth her first child, the voice of the daughter of Zion, who gasps for breath, who spreads her hands, saying, Woe is me now! For my soul faints before the murderers.
Run ye to and fro through the streets of Jerusalem,  see now,  know,  seek in the broad places of it, if ye can find a man, if there is any who does justly, who seeks truth,  I will pardon her.
though they say, As Jehovah lives, surely they swear falsely.
O Jehovah, do not thine eyes look upon truth? Thou have stricken them,  they were not grieved. Thou have consumed them,  they have refused to receive correction. They have made their faces harder than a rock. They have refused to return.
Then I said, Surely these are poor, they are foolish, for they know not the way of Jehovah, nor the law of their God.
I will go to the great men,  will speak to them, for they know the way of Jehovah,  the law of their God. But these with one accord have broken the yoke,  burst the bonds.
Therefore a lion out of the forest shall kill them; a wolf of the evenings shall destroy them; a leopard shall watch against their cities. Everyone who goes out from there shall be torn in pieces, because their transgressions are many,  their backslidings are increased.
How can I pardon thee? Thy sons have forsaken me,  sworn by those who are no gods. When I had fed them to the full, they committed adultery,  assembled themselves in troops at the harlots' houses.
They were as fed horses roaming at large; everyone neighed after his neighbor's wife.
Shall I not visit for these things? says Jehovah. And shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this?
Go ye up upon her walls,  destroy,  make not a full end. Take away her branches, for they are not Jehovah's.
For the house of Israel and the house of Judah have dealt very treacherously against me, says Jehovah.
They have denied Jehovah,  said, It is not he. Neither shall evil come upon us, nor shall we see sword nor famine.
the prophets shall become wind,  the word is not in them. Thus shall it be done to them.
Therefore thus says Jehovah, the God of hosts: Because ye speak this word, behold, I will make my words in thy mouth fire,  this people wood,  it shall devour them.
Lo, I will bring a nation upon you from far, O house of Israel, says Jehovah. It is a mighty nation. It is an ancient nation, a nation whose language thou know not, nor understand what they say.
Their quiver is an open sepulcher. They are all mighty men.
they shall eat up thy harvest,  thy bread, which thy sons and thy daughters should eat. They shall eat up thy flocks and thy herds. They shall eat up thy vines and thy fig trees. They shall beat down thy fortified cities, wherein thou trust, with the sword.
But even in those days, says Jehovah, I will not make a full end with you.
it shall come to pass, when ye shall say, Why has Jehovah our God done all these things to us? Then thou shall say to them, Just as ye have forsaken me,  served foreign gods in your land, so ye shall serve strangers in a land that is not yours.
Declare ye this in the house of Jacob,  publish it in Judah, saying,
Hear now this, O foolish people,  without understanding, who have eyes,  see not, who have ears,  hear not:
Do ye not fear me? says Jehovah. Will ye not tremble at my presence, who have placed the sand for the bound of the sea by a perpetual decree, that it cannot pass it? And though the waves thereof toss themselves, yet they cannot prevail, though they roar, yet they cannot pass over it.
But this people has a revolting and a rebellious heart. They have revolted and gone.
Neither do they say in their heart, Let us now fear Jehovah our God, who gives rain, both the former and the latter, in its season, who preserves to us the appointed weeks of the harvest.
Your iniquities have turned away these things,  your sins have withheld good from you.
For among my people are found wicked men. They watch as fowlers lie in wait. They set a trap; they catch men.
As a cage is full of birds, so are their houses full of deceit. Therefore they have become great,  grown rich.
They have grown fat. They shine. Yea, they overflow in deeds of wickedness. They do not plead the cause, the cause of the fatherless, that they may prosper. And they do not judge the right of the needy.
Shall I not visit for these things? says Jehovah. Shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this?
An astonishing and horrible thing has come to pass in the land.
The prophets prophesy falsely,  the priests bear rule by their means. And my people love to have it so. And what will ye do in the end thereof?
Flee for safety, ye sons of Benjamin, out of the midst of Jerusalem. And blow the trumpet in Tekoa,  raise up a signal on Beth-haccherem. For evil looks forth from the north,  a great destruction.
The comely and delicate one, the daughter of Zion, I will cut off.
Shepherds with their flocks shall come to her. They shall pitch their tents against her round about. They shall feed every one in his place.
Prepare ye war against her. Arise,  let us go up at noon. Woe to us! For the day declines; for the shadows of the evening are stretched out.
Arise,  let us go up by night,  let us destroy her palaces.
For thus has Jehovah of hosts said: Hew ye down trees,  cast up a mound against Jerusalem. This is the city to be visited. She has oppression completely in the midst of her.
As a well casts forth its waters, so she casts forth her wickedness. Violence and destruction is heard in her. Continually before me is sickness and wounds.
Be thou instructed, O Jerusalem, lest my soul be alienated from thee, lest I make thee a desolation, a land not inhabited.
Thus says Jehovah of hosts: They shall thoroughly glean the remnant of Israel as a vine. Turn again thy hand as a grape gatherer into the baskets.
To whom shall I speak and testify, that they may hear? Behold, their ear is uncircumcised,  they cannot hearken. Behold, the word of Jehovah has become to them a reproach; they have no delight in it.
Therefore I am full of the wrath of Jehovah. I am weary with holding in. Pour it out upon the sons in the street,  upon the assembly of young men together. For even the husband with the wife shall be taken, the aged with him who is full of days.
their houses shall be turned to others, their fields and their wives together. For I will stretch out my hand upon the inhabitants of the land, says Jehovah.
For from the least of them even to the greatest of them everyone is given to covetousness. And from the prophet even to the priest everyone deals falsely.
They have also lightly healed the hurt of my people, saying, Peace, peace, when there is no peace.
Were they ashamed when they had committed abomination? No, they were not at all ashamed, nor could they blush. Therefore they shall fall among those who fall. At the time that I visit them they shall be cast down, says Jehovah.
Thus says Jehovah, Stand ye in the ways and see. And ask for the old paths where is the good way. And walk in it,  ye shall find rest for your souls. But they said, We will not walk.
I set watchmen over you, saying, Hearken to the sound of the trumpet. But they said, We will not hearken.
Therefore hear, ye nations,  know, O congregation, what is among them.
Hear, O earth: Behold, I will bring evil upon this people, even the fruit of their thoughts, because they have not hearkened to my words. And as for my law, they have rejected it.
To what purpose does there come to me frankincense from Sheba,  the sweet cane from a far country? Your burnt offerings are not acceptable, nor your sacrifices pleasing to me.
Therefore thus says Jehovah: Behold, I will lay stumbling-blocks before this people,  the fathers and the sons together shall stumble against them. The neighbor and his friend shall perish.
Thus says Jehovah, Behold, a people comes from the north country,  a great nation shall be stirred up from the outermost parts of the earth.
They lay hold on bow and spear. They are cruel,  have no mercy. Their voice roars like the sea,  they ride upon horses. Each one set in array, as a man to the battle, against thee, O daughter of Zion.
We have heard the report of it. Our hands grow feeble. Anguish has taken hold of us,  pangs as of a woman in travail.
Go not forth into the field, nor walk by the way, for the sword of the enemy,  terror, are on every side.
O daughter of my people, gird thee with sackcloth,  wallow thyself in ashes. Make thee mourning, as for an only son, a most bitter lamentation. For the destroyer shall suddenly come upon us.
I have made thee a prover and a fortress among my people, that thou may know and try their way.
They are all grievous revolters, going about with slanders. They are brass and iron. They all of them deal corruptly.
The bellows blow fiercely, the lead is consumed of the fire. In vain do they go on refining, for the wicked are not plucked away.
Waste silver, men shall call them, because Jehovah has rejected them.
The word that came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying,
Stand in the gate of Jehovah's house,  proclaim there this word,  say, Hear the word of Jehovah, all ye of Judah, who enter in at these gates to worship Jehovah.
Thus says Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: Amend your ways and your doings,  I will cause you to dwell in this place.
Trust ye not in lying words, saying, The temple of Jehovah, the temple of Jehovah, the temple of Jehovah, are these.
For if ye thoroughly amend your ways and your doings, if ye thoroughly execute justice between a man and his neighbor,
if ye do not oppress the sojourner, the fatherless,  the widow,  shed not innocent blood in this place, nor walk after other gods to your own hurt,
then I will cause you to dwell in this place, in the land that I gave to your fathers from of old even for evermore.
Behold, ye trust in lying words, that cannot profit.
Will ye steal, murder,  commit adultery,  swear falsely,  burn incense to Baal,  walk after other gods that ye have not known,
then come and stand before me in this house, which is called by my name,  say, We are delivered, that ye may do all these abominations?
Has this house, which is called by my name, become a den of robbers in your eyes? Behold, I, even I, have seen it, says Jehovah.
But go ye now to my place which was in Shiloh, where I caused my name to dwell at the first,  see what I did to it for the wickedness of my people Israel.
now, because ye have done all these works, says Jehovah. And I spoke to you, rising up early and speaking,  ye heard not,  I called you,  ye answered not,
therefore I will do to the house, which is called by my name, in which ye trust,  to the place which I gave to you and to your fathers, as I did to Shiloh.
I will cast you out of my sight, as I have cast out all your brothers, even the whole seed of Ephraim.
Therefore pray thou not for this people, nor lift up cry nor prayer for them. Neither make intercession to me, for I will not hear thee.
Do thou not see what they do in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem?
The sons gather wood,  the fathers kindle the fire,  the women knead the dough, to make cakes to the queen of heaven,  to pour out drink offerings to other gods, that they may provoke me to anger.
Do they provoke me to anger? says Jehovah,  not themselves, to the confusion of their own faces?
Therefore thus says the lord Jehovah: Behold, my anger and my wrath shall be poured out upon this place, upon man,  upon beast,  upon the trees of the field,  upon the fruit of the ground. And it shall burn,  shall not be quenched.
Thus says Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: Add your burnt offerings to your sacrifices,  eat ye flesh.
For I spoke not to your fathers, nor commanded them in the day that I brought them out of the land of Egypt, concerning burnt offerings or sacrifices.
But this thing I commanded them, saying, Hearken to my voice,  I will be your God,  ye shall be my people. And walk ye in all the way that I command you, that it may be well with you.
But they hearkened not, nor inclined their ear,  walked in their own counsels, in the stubbornness of their evil heart,  went backward,  not forward.
Since the day that your fathers came forth out of the land of Egypt to this day, I have sent to you all my servants the prophets, daily rising up early and sending them.
Yet they hearkened not to me, nor inclined their ear,  made their neck stiff. They did worse than their fathers.
thou shall speak all these words to them,  they will not hearken to thee. Thou shall also call to them,  they will not answer thee.
thou shall say to them, This is the nation that has not hearkened to the voice of Jehovah their God, nor received instruction. Truth has perished,  is cut off from their mouth.
Cut off thy hair, O Jerusalem,  cast it away,  take up a lamentation on the bare heights. For Jehovah has rejected and forsaken the generation of his wrath.
For the sons of Judah have done that which is evil in my sight, says Jehovah. They have set their abominations in the house which is called by my name, to defile it.
they have built the high places of Topheth, which is in the valley of the son of Hinnom, to burn their sons and their daughters in the fire, which I did not command, nor did it come into my mind.
Therefore, behold, the days come, says Jehovah, that it shall no more be called Topheth, nor The valley of the son of Hinnom,  The valley of Slaughter. For they shall bury in Topheth, till there be no place to bury.
the dead bodies of this people shall be food for the birds of the heavens,  for the beasts of the earth,  none shall frighten them away.
Then I will cause to cease from the cities of Judah,  from the streets of Jerusalem, the voice of mirth and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride, for the land shall become a waste.
At that time, says Jehovah, they shall bring out the bones of the kings of Judah,  the bones of his rulers,  the bones of the priests,  the bones of the prophets,  the bones of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, out of their graves.
they shall spread them before the sun,  the moon,  all the host of heaven, which they have loved,  which they have served,  after which they have walked,  which they have sought,  which they have worshiped. They shall not be gathered, nor be buried. They shall be for dung upon the face of the earth.
death shall be chosen rather than life by all the residue that remain of this evil family, that remain in all the places where I have driven them, says Jehovah of hosts.
Moreover thou shall say to them, Thus says Jehovah: Shall men fall,  not rise up again? Shall he turn away,  not return?
Why then has this people of Jerusalem slid back by a perpetual backsliding? They hold firm deceit. They refuse to return.
I hearkened and heard,  they did not speak aright. No man repents of his wickedness, saying, What have I done? Everyone turns to his course as a horse that rushes headlong in the battle.
Yea, the stork in the heavens knows her appointed times,  the turtledove and the swallow and the crane observe the time of their coming,  my people know not the law of Jehovah.
How can ye say, We are wise,  the law of Jehovah is with us? But behold, the false pen of the scribes has wrought falsely.
The wise men are put to shame. They are dismayed and taken. Lo, they have rejected the word of Jehovah,  what manner of wisdom is in them?
Therefore I will give their wives to others,  their fields to those who shall possess them. For everyone from the least even to the greatest is given to covetousness. From the prophet even to the priest everyone deals falsely.
they have lightly healed the hurt of the daughter of my people, saying, Peace, peace, when there is no peace.
Were they ashamed when they had committed abomination? No, they were not at all ashamed, nor could they blush. Therefore they shall fall among those who fall. In the time of their visitation they shall be cast down, says Jehovah.
I will utterly consume them, says Jehovah. There shall be no grapes on the vine, nor figs on the fig tree,  the leaf shall fade,  things I have given them shall pass away from them.
Why do we sit still? Assemble yourselves,  let us enter into the fortified cities,  let us be silent there. For Jehovah our God has put us to silence,  given us water of gall to drink, because we have sinned against Jehovah.
We looked for peace,  no good came, for a time of healing, , behold, dismay!
The snorting of his horses is heard from Dan. At the sound of the neighing of his strong ones the whole land trembles. For they have come,  have devoured the land and all that is in it, the city and those who dwell therein.
For, behold, I will send serpents, adders, among you, which will not be charmed,  they shall bite you, says Jehovah.
Oh that I could comfort myself against sorrow! My heart is faint within me.
Behold, the voice of the cry of the daughter of my people from a land that is very far off: Is not Jehovah in Zion? Is not her King in her? Why have they provoked me to anger with their graven images,  with foreign vanities?
The harvest is past, the summer is ended,  we are not saved.
For the hurt of the daughter of my people I am hurt. I mourn. Dismay has taken hold on me.
Is there no balm in Gilead? Is there no physician there? Why then has not the health of the daughter of my people recovered?
Oh that my head were waters,  my eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of my people!
Oh that I had in the wilderness a lodging-place of wayfaring men, that I might leave my people,  go from them! For they are all adulterers, an assembly of treacherous men.
they bend their tongue-their bow-for falsehood,  they have grown strong in the land,  not for truth. For they proceed from evil to evil,  they do not know me, says Jehovah.
Take ye heed each one of his neighbor,  trust ye not in any brother, for every brother will utterly supplant,  every neighbor will go about with slanders.
they will deceive each one his neighbor,  will not speak the truth. They have taught their tongue to speak lies. They weary themselves to commit iniquity.
Thy habitation is in the midst of deceit. Through deceit they refuse to know me, says Jehovah.
Therefore thus says Jehovah of hosts: Behold, I will melt them,  try them, for how else should I do, because of the daughter of my people?
Their tongue is a deadly arrow; it speaks deceit. He speaks peaceably to his neighbor with his mouth,  in his heart he lies wait for him.
Shall I not visit them for these things? says Jehovah. Shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this?
For the mountains I will take up a weeping and wailing,  for the pastures of the wilderness a lamentation, because they are burned up, so that none passes through, nor can men hear the voice of the cattle. Both the birds of the heavens and the beasts have fled; they are gone.
I will make Jerusalem heaps, a dwelling-place of jackals. And I will make the cities of Judah a desolation, without inhabitant.
Who is the wise man, who may understand this,  he to whom the mouth of Jehovah has spoken, that he may declare it? Why has the land perished and burned up like a wilderness, so that none passes through?
Jehovah says, Because they have forsaken my law which I set before them,  have not obeyed my voice, nor walked in it,
but have walked after the stubbornness of their own heart,  after the Baalim, which their fathers taught them.
Therefore thus says Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: Behold, I will feed them, even this people, with wormwood,  give them water of gall to drink.
I will scatter them also among the nations, whom neither they nor their fathers have known. And I will send the sword after them, till I have consumed them.
Thus says Jehovah of hosts, Consider ye,  call for the mourning women, that they may come,  send for the skilful women, that they may come.
let them make haste,  take up a wailing for us, that our eyes may run down with tears,  our eyelids gush out with waters.
For a voice of wailing is heard out of Zion, How we are ruined! We are greatly confounded, because we have forsaken the land, because they have cast down our dwellings.
Yet hear the word of Jehovah, O ye women,  let your ear receive the word of his mouth,  teach your daughters wailing,  each one her neighbor lamentation.
For death has come up into our windows. It has entered into our palaces, to cut off the sons from outside, the young men from the streets.
Speak, Thus says Jehovah: The dead bodies of men shall fall as dung upon the open field,  as the handful after the harvestman,  none shall gather.
Thus says Jehovah: Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, nor let the mighty man glory in his might. Let not the rich man glory in his riches,
but let him who boasts boast in this, that he has understanding,  knows me, that I am Jehovah who exercises loving kindness, justice,  righteousness, in the earth. For in these things I delight, says Jehovah.
Behold, the days come, says Jehovah, that I will punish all those who are circumcised in their uncircumcision:
Egypt,  Judah,  Edom,  the sons of Ammon,  Moab,  all who have the corners of their hair cut off, who dwell in the wilderness. For all the nations are uncircumcised,  all the house of Israel are uncircumcised in heart.
Hear ye the word which Jehovah speaks to you, O house of Israel.
Thus says Jehovah: Learn not the way of the nations,  be not dismayed at the signs of heaven, for the nations are dismayed at them.
For the customs of the peoples are vanity. For a man cuts a tree out of the forest, the work of the hands of the workman with the axe.
They deck it with silver and with gold. They fasten it with nails and with hammers, that it not move.
They are like a palm tree, of turned work,  do not speak. They must be carried, because they cannot go. Be not afraid of them, for they cannot do evil, nor is it in them to do good.
There is none like thee, O Jehovah. Thou are great,  thy name is great in might.
Who should not fear thee, O King of the nations? For to thee it appertains, inasmuch as among all the wise men of the nations,  in all their royal estate, there is none like thee.
But they are together brutish and foolish, the instruction of idols! It is but a block of wood.
There is silver beaten into plates, which is brought from Tarshish,  gold from Uphaz, the work of the artificer and of the hands of the goldsmith, blue and purple for their clothing. They are all the work of skilful men.
But Jehovah is the true God. He is the living God,  an everlasting King. At his wrath the earth trembles,  the nations are not able to abide his indignation.
Thus ye shall say to them: The gods that have not made the heavens and the earth, these shall perish from the earth,  from under the heavens.
He has made the earth by his power. He has established the world by his wisdom,  by his understanding he has stretched out the heavens.
When he utters his voice, there is a tumult of waters in the heavens,  he causes the vapors to ascend from the ends of the earth. He makes lightnings for the rain,  brings forth the wind out of his treasuries.
Every man has become brutish, without knowledge. Every goldsmith is put to shame by his graven image. For his molten image is falsehood,  there is no breath in them.
They are vanity, a work of delusion. In the time of their visitation they shall perish.
The portion of Jacob is not like these. For he is the former of all things,  Israel is the tribe of his inheritance. Jehovah of hosts is his name.
Gather up thy wares out of the land, O thou who abides in the siege.
For thus says Jehovah, Behold, I will sling out the inhabitants of the land at this time,  will distress them, that they may feel it.
Woe is me because of my hurt! My wound is grievous,  I said, Truly this is my grief,  I must bear it.
My tent is destroyed,  all my cords are broken. My sons have gone forth from me,  they are not. There is none to spread my tent any more,  to set up my curtains.
For the shepherds have become brutish,  have not inquired of Jehovah. Therefore they have not prospered,  all their flocks are scattered.
The voice of news. Behold, it comes,  a great commotion out of the north country, to make the cities of Judah a desolation, a dwelling-place of jackals.
O Jehovah, I know that the way of man is not in himself. It is not in man who walks to direct his steps.
O Jehovah, correct me,  in measure, not in thine anger, lest thou bring me to nothing.
Pour out thy wrath upon the nations that know thee not,  upon the families that call not on thy name. For they have devoured Jacob. Yea, they have devoured him and consumed him,  have laid waste his habitation.
The word that came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying,
Hear ye the words of this covenant,  speak to the men of Judah,  to the inhabitants of Jerusalem,
say thou to them, Thus says Jehovah, the God of Israel: Cursed be the man who does not hear the words of this covenant,
which I commanded your fathers in the day that I brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, out of the iron furnace, saying, Obey my voice,  do them, according to all which I command you, so ye shall be my people,  I will be your God,
that I may establish the oath which I swore to your fathers, to give them a land flowing with milk and honey, as at this day. Then I answered,  said, Truly, O Jehovah.
Jehovah said to me, Proclaim all these words in the cities of Judah,  in the streets of Jerusalem, saying, Hear ye the words of this covenant,  do them.
For I earnestly protested to your fathers in the day that I brought them up out of the land of Egypt, even to this day, rising early and protesting, saying, Obey my voice.
Yet they obeyed not, nor inclined their ear,  walked each one in the stubbornness of his evil heart. Therefore I brought upon them all the words of this covenant, which I commanded them to do,  they did them not.
Jehovah said to me, A conspiracy is found among the men of Judah,  among the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
They have turned back to the iniquities of their forefathers, who refused to hear my words,  they have gone after other gods to serve them. The house of Israel and the house of Judah have broken my covenant which I made with their fathers.
Therefore thus says Jehovah, Behold, I will bring evil upon them, which they shall not be able to escape. And they shall cry to me,  I will not hearken to them.
Then the cities of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem shall go and cry to the gods to which they offer incense,  they will not save them at all in the time of their trouble.
For according to the number of thy cities are thy gods, O Judah,  according to the number of the streets of Jerusalem ye have set up altars to the shameful thing, even altars to burn incense to Baal.
Therefore do not pray thou for this people, nor lift up cry nor prayer for them, for I will not hear them in the time that they cry to me because of their trouble.
What has my beloved to do in my house, seeing she has wrought lewdness with many,  the holy flesh has passed from thee? When thou do evil, then thou rejoice.
Jehovah called thy name, A green olive tree, fair with goodly fruit. With the noise of a great tumult he has kindled fire upon it,  the branches of it are broken.
For Jehovah of hosts, who planted thee, has pronounced evil against thee because of the evil of the house of Israel and of the house of Judah, which they have wrought for themselves in provoking me to anger by offering incense to Baal.
Jehovah gave me knowledge of it,  I knew it. Then thou showed me their doings.
But I was like a gentle lamb that is led to the slaughter. And I knew not that they had devised devices against me, saying, Let us destroy the tree with the fruit of it. And let us cut him off from the land of the living, that his name may no more be remembered.
But, O Jehovah of hosts, who judges righteously, who tries the heart and the mind, I shall see thy vengeance on them, for to thee I have revealed my case.
Therefore thus says Jehovah concerning the men of Anathoth, who seek thy life, saying, Thou shall not prophesy in the name of Jehovah, that thou not die by our hand.
Therefore thus says Jehovah of hosts: Behold, I will punish them. The young men shall die by the sword. Their sons and their daughters shall die by famine,
there shall be no remnant to them. For I will bring evil upon the men of Anathoth, even the year of their visitation.
Thou are righteous, O Jehovah, when I contend with thee. Yet I would reason the case with thee. Why does the way of the wicked prosper? Why are all those at ease who deal very treacherously?
Thou have planted them. Yea, they have taken root, they grow. Yea, they bring forth fruit. Thou are near in their mouth,  far from their heart.
But thou, O Jehovah, know me. Thou see me,  try my heart toward thee. Pull them out like sheep for the slaughter,  prepare them for the day of slaughter.
How long shall the land mourn,  the herbs of the whole country wither? For the wickedness of those who dwell therein, the beasts are consumed,  the birds, because they said, He shall not see our latter end.
If thou have run with the footmen,  they have wearied thee, then how can thou contend with horses? And though in a land of peace thou are secure, yet how will thou do in the pride of the Jordan?
For even thy brothers,  the house of thy father, even they have dealt treacherously with thee, even they have cried aloud after thee. Believe them not, though they speak fair words to thee.
I have forsaken my house. I have cast off my heritage. I have given the dearly beloved of my soul into the hand of her enemies.
My heritage has become to me as a lion in the forest. She has uttered her voice against me. Therefore I have hated her.
Is my heritage to me as a speckled bird of prey? Are the birds of prey against her round about? Go ye, assemble all the beasts of the field; bring them to devour.
Many shepherds have destroyed my vineyard. They have trodden my portion under foot. They have made my pleasant portion a desolate wilderness.
They have made it a desolation. It mourns to me, being desolate. The whole land is made desolate, because no man lays it to heart.
Destroyers have come upon all the bare heights in the wilderness. For the sword of Jehovah devours from the one end of the land even to the other end of the land. No flesh has peace.
They have sown wheat,  have reaped thorns. They have put themselves to pain,  profit nothing. And ye shall be ashamed of your fruits, because of the fierce anger of Jehovah.
Thus says Jehovah against all my evil neighbors, who touch the inheritance which I have caused my people Israel to inherit: Behold, I will pluck them up from off their land,  will pluck up the house of Judah from among them.
it shall come to pass, after I have plucked them up, I will return and have compassion on them. And I will bring them again, each man to his heritage,  each man to his land.
it shall come to pass, if they will diligently learn the ways of my people, to swear by my name, As Jehovah lives, even as they taught my people to swear by Baal, then they shall be built up in the midst of my people.
But if they will not hear, then I will pluck up that nation, plucking up and destroying it, says Jehovah.
Thus says Jehovah to me, Go,  buy thee a linen sash,  put it upon thy loins,  do not put it in water.
So I bought a sash according to the word of Jehovah,  put it upon my loins.
the word of Jehovah came to me the second time, saying,
Take the sash that thou have bought, which is upon thy loins,  arise, go to the Euphrates,  hide it there in a cleft of the rock.
So I went,  hid it by the Euphrates, as Jehovah commanded me.
it came to pass after many days, that Jehovah said to me, Arise, go to the Euphrates,  take the sash from there, which I commanded thee to hide there.
Then I went to the Euphrates,  dug,  took the sash from the place where I had hid it. And, behold, the sash was rotten. It was good for nothing.
Then the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Thus says Jehovah, After this manner I will mar the pride of Judah,  the great pride of Jerusalem.
This evil people, who refuse to hear my words, who walk in the stubbornness of their heart,  have gone after other gods to serve them,  to worship them, shall even be as this sash, which is good for nothing.
For as the sash clings to the loins of a man, so I have caused to cling to me the whole house of Israel and the whole house of Judah, says Jehovah, that they may be to me for a people,  for a name,  for a praise,  for a glory,  they would not hear.
Therefore thou shall speak to them this word. Thus says Jehovah, the God of Israel: Every bottle shall be filled with wine. And they shall say to thee, Do we not certainly know that every bottle shall be filled with wine?
Then thou shall say to them, Thus says Jehovah: Behold, I will fill all the inhabitants of this land, even the kings who sit upon David's throne,  the priests,  the prophets,  all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, with drunkenness.
I will dash them one against another, even the fathers and the sons together, says Jehovah. I will not pity, nor spare, nor have compassion, that I should not destroy them.
Hear ye,  give ear, be not proud, for Jehovah has spoken.
Give glory to Jehovah your God, before he causes darkness,  before your feet stumble upon the dark mountains. And, while ye look for light, he turns it into the shadow of death,  makes it gross darkness.
But if ye will not hear it, my soul shall weep in secret for your pride. And my eye shall weep greatly,  run down with tears, because Jehovah's flock is taken captive.
Say thou to the king and to the queen-mother: Humble yourselves. Sit down, for your coronets have come down, even the crown of your glory.
The cities of the South are shut up,  there is none to open them. Judah is carried away captive, all of it. It is wholly carried away captive.
Lift up your eyes,  behold those who come from the north. Where is the flock that was given thee, thy beautiful flock?
What will thou say when he shall set over thee as head those whom thou thyself have taught to be friends to thee? Shall not sorrows take hold of thee as of a woman in travail?
if thou say in thy heart, Why have these things come upon me? For the greatness of thine iniquity thy skirts are uncovered,  thy heels suffer violence.
Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the leopard his spots? Then ye also may do good, who are accustomed to do evil.
Therefore I will scatter them as the stubble that passes away by the wind of the wilderness.
This is thy lot, the portion measured to thee from me, says Jehovah, because thou have forgotten me,  trusted in falsehood.
Therefore I will also uncover thy skirts upon thy face,  thy shame shall appear.
I have seen thine abominations, even thine adulteries,  thy neighings, the lewdness of thy whoredom, on the hills, in the field. Woe to thee, O Jerusalem! Thou will not be made clean. How long shall it yet be?
The word of Jehovah that came to Jeremiah concerning the drought.
Judah mourns,  the gates thereof languish. They sit in black upon the ground,  the cry of Jerusalem has gone up.
their ranking men send their little ones to the waters. They come to the cisterns,  find no water. They return with their vessels empty. They are put to shame and confounded,  cover their heads,
because of the ground which is cracked. Because no rain has been in the land, the plowmen are put to shame; they cover their heads.
Yea, the hind also in the field calves,  forsakes it because there is no grass.
the wild donkeys stand on the bare heights. They pant for air like jackals. Their eyes fail because there is no herbage.
Though our iniquities testify against us, work thou for thy name's sake, O Jehovah. For our backslidings are many. We have sinned against thee.
O thou hope of Israel, the Savior of it in the time of trouble, why should thou be as a sojourner in the land,  as a wayfaring man who turns aside to tarry for a night?
Why should thou be as a man frightened, as a mighty man who cannot save? Yet thou, O Jehovah, are in the midst of us,  we are called by thy name. Do not leave us.
Thus says Jehovah to this people: Even so they have loved to wander. They have not restrained their feet. Therefore Jehovah does not accept them. Now he will remember their iniquity,  visit their sins.
Jehovah said to me, Pray not for this people for good.
When they fast, I will not hear their cry. And when they offer burnt offering and meal offering, I will not accept them. But I will consume them by the sword,  by the famine,  by the pestilence.
Then I said, Ah, lord Jehovah! Behold, the prophets say to them, Ye shall not see the sword, nor shall ye have famine,  I will give you assured peace in this place.
Then Jehovah said to me, The prophets prophesy lies in my name. I did not send them, nor have I commanded them, nor did I speak to them. They prophesy to you a lying vision,  divination,  a thing of naught,  the deceit of their own heart.
Therefore thus says Jehovah concerning the prophets who prophesy in my name,  I did not send them, yet they say, Sword and famine shall not be in this land: By sword and famine those prophets shall be consumed.
the people to whom they prophesy shall be cast out in the streets of Jerusalem because of the famine and the sword,  they shall have none to bury them-them, their wives, nor their sons, nor their daughters. For I will pour their wickedness upon them.
thou shall say this word to them: Let my eyes run down with tears night and day,  let them not cease. For the virgin daughter of my people is broken with a great breach, with a very grievous wound.
If I go forth into the field, then, behold, the slain with the sword! And if I enter into the city, then, behold, those who are sick with famine! For both the prophet and the priest go about in the land,  have no knowledge.
Have thou utterly rejected Judah? Has thy soul loathed Zion? Why have thou smitten us,  there is no healing for us? We looked for peace,  no good came,  for a time of healing, , behold, dismay!
We acknowledge, O Jehovah, our wickedness,  the iniquity of our fathers, for we have sinned against thee.
Do not abhor us. For thy name's sake, do not disgrace the throne of thy glory. Remember, do not break thy covenant with us.
Are there any among the vanities of the nations that can cause rain? Or can the heavens give showers? Are not thou he, O Jehovah our God? Therefore we will wait for thee, for thou have made all these things.
Then Jehovah said to me, Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet my mind would not be toward this people. Cast them out of my sight,  let them go forth.
it shall come to pass, when they say to thee, Where shall we go forth? Then thou shall tell them, Thus says Jehovah: Such as are for death, to death,  such as are for the sword, to the sword,  such as are for the famine, to the famine,  such as are for captivity, to captivity.
I will appoint over them four kinds, says Jehovah: the sword to kill,  the dogs to tear,  the birds of the heavens,  the beasts of the earth, to devour and to destroy.
I will cause them to be tossed to and fro among all the kingdoms of the earth, because of Manasseh, the son of Hezekiah, king of Judah, for that which he did in Jerusalem.
For who will have pity upon thee, O Jerusalem? Or who will bemoan thee? Or who will turn aside to ask of thy welfare?
Thou have rejected me, says Jehovah. Thou have gone backward. Therefore I have stretched out my hand against thee,  destroyed thee. I am weary with relenting.
I have winnowed them with a fan in the gates of the land. I have bereaved them of sons. I have destroyed my people. They did not return from their ways.
Their widows have increased to me above the sand of the seas. I have brought upon them, against the mother of the young men, a destroyer at noonday. I have caused anguish and terrors to fall upon her suddenly.
She who has borne seven, languishes. She has given up the spirit. Her sun has gone down while it was yet day. She has been put to shame and confounded. And the residue of them I will deliver to the sword before their enemies, says Jehovah.
Woe is me, my mother, that thou have bore me, a man of strife and a man of contention to the whole earth! I have not lent, nor have men lent to me, yet every one of them curses me.
Jehovah said, Truly I will strengthen thee for good. Truly I will cause the enemy to make supplication to thee in the time of evil and in the time of affliction.
Can a man break iron, even iron from the north,  brass?
Thy substance and thy treasures I will give for a spoil without price. And that for all thy sins, even in all thy borders.
I will make them to pass with thine enemies into a land which thou know not. For a fire is kindled in my anger, which shall burn upon you.
O Jehovah, thou know. Remember me,  visit me,  avenge me of my persecutors. Take me not away in thy longsuffering. Know that for thy sake I have suffered reproach.
Thy words were found,  I ate them. And thy words were to me a joy and the rejoicing of my heart. For I am called by thy name, O Jehovah, God of hosts.
I did not sit in the assembly of those who make merry, nor did I rejoice. I sat alone because of thy hand, for thou have filled me with indignation.
Why is my pain perpetual,  my wound incurable, which refuses to be healed? Will thou indeed be to me as a deceitful brook, as waters that fail?
Therefore thus says Jehovah: If thou return, then I will bring thee again that thou may stand before me. And if thou take forth the precious from the vile, thou shall be as my mouth. They shall return to thee,  thou shall not return to them.
I will make thee to this people a fortified brazen wall. And they shall fight against thee,  they shall not prevail against thee. For I am with thee to save thee and to deliver thee, says Jehovah.
I will deliver thee out of the hand of the wicked,  I will redeem thee out of the hand of the terrible.
The word of Jehovah came also to me, saying,
Thou shall not take thee a wife, nor shall thou have sons or daughters, in this place.
For thus says Jehovah concerning the sons and concerning the daughters that are born in this place,  concerning their mothers who bore them,  concerning their fathers who begot them in this land:
They shall die grievous deaths. They shall not be lamented, nor shall they be buried; they shall be as dung upon the face of the ground. And they shall be consumed by the sword,  by famine. And their dead bodies shall be food for the birds of the heavens,  for the beasts of the earth.
For thus says Jehovah, Enter not into the house of mourning, nor go to lament, nor bemoan them, for I have taken away my peace from this people, says Jehovah, even loving kindness and tender mercies.
Both great and small shall die in this land. They shall not be buried, nor shall men lament for them, nor cut themselves, nor make themselves bald for them,
nor shall men break bread for them in mourning, to comfort them for the dead, nor shall men give them the cup of consolation to drink for their father or for their mother.
thou shall not go into the house of feasting to sit with them, to eat and to drink.
For thus says Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: Behold, I will cause to cease out of this place, before your eyes and in your days, the voice of mirth and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride.
it shall come to pass, when thou shall show this people all these words,  they shall say to thee, Why has Jehovah pronounced all this great evil against us? Or what is our iniquity? Or what is our sin that we have committed against Jehovah our God?
Then thou shall say to them, Because your fathers have forsaken me, says Jehovah,  have walked after other gods,  have served them,  have worshiped them,  have forsaken me,  have not kept my law.
ye have done evil more than your fathers, for, behold, ye walk each one after the stubbornness of his evil heart, so that ye hearken not to me.
Therefore I will cast you forth out of this land into the land that ye have not known, neither ye nor your fathers,  there ye shall serve other gods day and night, for I will show you no favor.
Therefore, behold, the days come, says Jehovah, that it shall no more be said, As Jehovah lives who brought up the sons of Israel out of the land of Egypt,
but, As Jehovah lives who brought up the sons of Israel from the land of the north,  from all the countries where he had driven them. And I will bring them again into their land that I gave to their fathers.
Behold, I will send for many fishermen, says Jehovah,  they shall fish them up. And afterward I will send for many hunters,  they shall hunt them from every mountain,  from every hill,  out of the clefts of the rocks.
For my eyes are upon all their ways. They are not hid from my face, nor is their iniquity concealed from my eyes.
first I will recompense their iniquity and their sin double, because they have polluted my land with the carcasses of their detestable things,  have filled my inheritance with their abominations.
O Jehovah, my strength,  my stronghold,  my refuge in the day of affliction, to thee the nations shall come from the ends of the earth,  shall say, Our fathers have inherited nothing but lies, even vanity and things in which there is no profit.
Shall a man make to himself gods, which yet are no gods?
Therefore, behold, I will cause them to know, this once I will cause them to know my hand and my might,  they shall know that my name is Jehovah.
The sin of Judah is written with a pen of iron,  with the point of a diamond. It is engraved upon the tablet of their heart,  upon the horns of your altars,
while their sons remember their altars and their Asherim by the green trees upon the high hills.
O my mountain in the field, I will give thy substance and all thy treasures for a spoil,  thy high places, because of sin, throughout all thy borders.
thou, even of thyself, shall discontinue from thy heritage that I gave thee,  I will cause thee to serve thine enemies in the land which thou know not. For ye have kindled a fire in my anger which shall burn forever.
Thus says Jehovah: Cursed is the man who trusts in man,  makes flesh his arm,  whose heart departs from Jehovah.
For he shall be like the heath in the desert,  shall not see when good comes,  shall inhabit the parched places in the wilderness, a salt land and not inhabited.
Blessed is the man who trusts in Jehovah,  whose trust Jehovah is.
For he shall be as a tree planted by the waters, that spreads out its roots by the river,  shall not fear when heat comes,  its leaf shall be green,  shall not be worried in the year of drought, nor shall cease from yielding fruit.
The heart is deceitful above all things,  it is exceedingly corrupt. Who can know it?
I, Jehovah, search the mind. I try the heart, even to give every man according to his ways, according to the fruit of his doings.
As the partridge that sits on eggs which she has not laid, so is he who gets riches,  not by right. In the midst of his days they shall leave him,  at his end he shall be a fool.
A glorious throne, set on high from the beginning, is the place of our sanctuary.
O Jehovah, the hope of Israel, all who forsake thee shall be put to shame. Those who depart from me shall be written in the earth, because they have forsaken Jehovah, the fountain of living waters.
Heal me, O Jehovah,  I shall be healed. Save me,  I shall be saved, for thou are my praise.
Behold, they say to me, Where is the word of Jehovah? Let it come now.
As for me, I have not hastened from being a shepherd after thee, nor have I desired the woeful day. Thou know. That which came out of my lips was before thy face.
Be not a terror to me. Thou are my refuge in the day of evil.
Let them be put to shame who persecute me,  let me not be put to shame. Let them be dismayed,  let me not be dismayed. Bring upon them the day of evil,  destroy them with double destruction.
Thus Jehovah said to me, Go,  stand in the gate of the sons of the people, by which the kings of Judah come in,  by which they go out,  in all the gates of Jerusalem.
say to them, Hear ye the word of Jehovah, ye kings of Judah,  all Judah,  all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, who enter in by these gates.
Thus says Jehovah: Take heed to yourselves,  bear no burden on the sabbath day, nor bring it in by the gates of Jerusalem.
Neither carry forth a burden out of your houses on the sabbath day, nor do ye any work. But hallow ye the sabbath day, as I commanded your fathers.
But they hearkened not, nor inclined their ear,  made their neck stiff, that they might not hear,  might not receive instruction.
it shall come to pass, if ye diligently hearken to me, says Jehovah, to bring in no burden through the gates of this city on the sabbath day,  to hallow the sabbath day, to do no work in it,
then there shall enter in by the gates of this city kings and rulers sitting upon the throne of David, riding in chariots and on horses, they,  their rulers, the men of Judah,  the inhabitants of Jerusalem. And this city shall remain forever.
they shall come from the cities of Judah,  from the places round about Jerusalem,  from the land of Benjamin,  from the lowland,  from the hill-country,  from the South, bringing burnt offerings,  sacrifices,  meal offerings,  frankincense,  bringing things of thanksgiving, to the house of Jehovah.
But if ye will not hearken to me to hallow the sabbath day,  not to bear a burden and enter in at the gates of Jerusalem on the sabbath day, then I will kindle a fire in the gates of it,  it shall devour the palaces of Jerusalem,  it shall not be quenched.
The word which came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying,
Arise,  go down to the potter's house,  there I will cause thee to hear my words.
Then I went down to the potter's house, , behold, he was making a work on the wheels.
when the vessel that he made of the clay was marred in the hand of the potter, he made it another vessel again, as seemed good to the potter to make it.
Then the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
O house of Israel, cannot I do with you as this potter? says Jehovah. Behold, as the clay in the potter's hand, so are ye in my hand, O house of Israel.
At that instant I shall speak concerning a nation,  concerning a kingdom, to pluck up and to break down and to destroy it,
if that nation, concerning which I have spoken, turns from their evil, I will relent of the evil that I thought to do to them.
at that instant I shall speak concerning a nation,  concerning a kingdom, to build and to plant it,
if they do that which is evil in my sight, that they obey not my voice, then I will relent of the good with which I said I would benefit them.
Now therefore, speak to the men of Judah,  to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying, Thus says Jehovah: Behold, I frame evil against you,  devise a device against you. Return ye now everyone from his evil way,  amend your ways and your doings.
But they say, It is in vain. For we will walk after our own devices,  we will do everyone according to the stubbornness of his evil heart.
Therefore thus says Jehovah: Ask ye now among the nations, Who has heard such things? The virgin of Israel has done a very horrible thing.
Shall the snow of Lebanon fail from the rock of the field? Or shall the cold waters that flow down from afar be dried up?
For my people have forgotten me. They have burned incense to false gods. And they have been made to stumble in their ways, in the ancient paths, to walk in bypaths, in a way not cast up,
to make their land an astonishment,  a perpetual hissing, everyone who passes by it shall be astonished,  shake his head.
I will scatter them as with an east wind before the enemy. I will show them the back,  not the face, in the day of their calamity.
Then they said, Come,  let us devise devices against Jeremiah. For the law shall not perish from the priest, nor counsel from the wise, nor the word from the prophet. Come,  let us smite him with the tongue,  let us not give heed to any of his words.
Give heed to me, O Jehovah,  hearken to the voice of those who contend with me.
Shall evil be recompensed for good? For they have dug a pit for my soul. Remember how I stood before thee to speak good for them, to turn away thy wrath from them.
Therefore deliver up their sons to the famine,  give them over to the power of the sword,  let their wives become childless,  widows,  let their men be slain of death,  their young men smitten of the sword in battle.
Let a cry be heard from their houses when thou shall bring a troop suddenly upon them, for they have dug a pit to take me,  hid snares for my feet.
Yet, Jehovah, thou know all their counsel against me to kill me. Do not forgive their iniquity, nor blot out their sin from thy sight,  let them be overthrown before thee. Deal thou with them in the time of thine anger.
Thus said Jehovah: Go,  buy a potter's earthen bottle,  take of the elders of the people,  of the elders of the priests,
go forth to the valley of the son of Hinnom, which is by the entry of the gate Harsith,  proclaim there the words that I shall tell thee.
say, Hear ye the word of Jehovah, O kings of Judah,  inhabitants of Jerusalem. Thus says Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: Behold, I will bring evil upon this place, which whoever hears, his ears shall tingle.
Because they have forsaken me,  have estranged this place,  have burned incense in it to other gods that they knew not, they and their fathers and the kings of Judah,  have filled this place with the blood of innocents,
have built the high places of Baal, to burn their sons in the fire for burnt offerings to Baal, which I commanded not, nor spoke it, neither did it come into my mind.
Therefore, behold, the days come, says Jehovah, that this place shall no more be called Topheth, nor the valley of the son of Hinnom,  the valley of Slaughter.
I will make void the counsel of Judah and Jerusalem in this place. And I will cause them to fall by the sword before their enemies,  by the hand of those who seek their life. And I will give their dead bodies to be food for the birds of the heavens,  for the beasts of the earth.
I will make this city an astonishment,  a hissing. Everyone who passes by it shall be astonished and hiss because of all the plagues of it.
I will cause them to eat the flesh of their sons and the flesh of their daughters. And they shall eat each one the flesh of his friend, in the siege and in the distress with which their enemies,  those who seek their life, shall distress them.
Then thou shall break the bottle in the sight of the men who go with thee,
shall say to them, Thus says Jehovah of hosts: Even so I will break this people and this city, as a potter's vessel is broken, that cannot be made whole again. And they shall bury in Topheth till there be no place to bury.
Thus I will do to this place, says Jehovah,  to the inhabitants of it, even making this city as Topheth.
the houses of Jerusalem,  the houses of the kings of Judah, which are defiled, shall be as the place of Topheth, even all the houses upon whose roofs they have burned incense to all the host of heaven,  have poured out drink offerings to other gods.
Then Jeremiah came from Topheth, where Jehovah had sent him to prophesy,  he stood in the court of Jehovah's house,  said to all the people,
Thus says Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: Behold, I will bring upon this city and upon all its towns all the evil that I have pronounced against it, because they have made their neck stiff, that they may not hear my words.
Now Pashhur, the son of Immer the priest, who was chief officer in the house of Jehovah, heard Jeremiah prophesying these things.
Then Pashhur smote Jeremiah the prophet,  put him in the stocks that were in the upper gate of Benjamin, which was in the house of Jehovah.
it came to pass on the morrow, that Pashhur brought forth Jeremiah out of the stocks. Then Jeremiah said to him, Jehovah has not called thy name Pashhur,  Magor-missabib.
For thus says Jehovah, Behold, I will make thee a terror to thyself,  to all thy friends. And they shall fall by the sword of their enemies,  thine eyes shall behold it. And I will give all Judah into the hand of the king of Babylon,  he shall carry them captive to Babylon,  shall kill them with the sword.
Moreover I will give all the riches of this city,  all the gains of it,  all the precious things of it, yea, all the treasures of the kings of Judah I will give into the hand of their enemies. And they shall make them a prey,  take them,  carry them to Babylon.
thou, Pashhur,  all who dwell in thy house shall go into captivity. And thou shall come to Babylon,  there thou shall die,  there thou shall be buried, thou,  all thy friends, to whom thou have prophesied falsely.
O Jehovah, thou have persuaded me,  I was persuaded. Thou are stronger than I,  have prevailed. I have become a laughing-stock all the day; everyone mocks me.
For as often as I speak, I cry out. I cry, Violence and destruction! Because the word of Jehovah is made a reproach to me,  a derision, all the day.
if I say, I will not make mention of him, nor speak any more in his name, then there is in my heart as it were a burning fire shut up in my bones,  I am weary with forbearing,  I cannot.
For I have heard the defaming of many, terror on every side. Denounce,  we will denounce him, say all my familiar friends, those who watch for my fall. Perhaps he will be persuaded,  we shall prevail against him,  we shall take our revenge on him.
But Jehovah is with me as an awesome mighty one. Therefore my persecutors shall stumble,  they shall not prevail. They shall be utterly put to shame, because they have not dealt wisely, even with an everlasting dishonor which shall never be forgotten.
But, O Jehovah of hosts, who tries the righteous, who sees the heart and the mind, let me see thy vengeance on them, for to thee I have revealed my cause.
Sing to Jehovah. Praise ye Jehovah, for he has delivered the soul of the needy man from the hand of evildoers.
Cursed be the day in which I was born. Let not the day in which my mother bore me be blessed.
Cursed be the man who brought news to my father, saying, A man-child is born to thee, making him very glad.
let that man be as the cities which Jehovah overthrew,  did not relent. And let him hear a cry in the morning,  shouting at noontime,
because he did not kill me from the womb,  so my mother would have been my grave,  her womb always great.
Why did I come forth out of the womb to see labor and sorrow, that my days should be consumed with shame?
The word which came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, when king Zedekiah sent to him Pashhur the son of Malchijah,  Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah, the priest, saying,
Inquire, I pray thee, of Jehovah for us. For Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon makes war against us. Perhaps Jehovah will deal with us according to all his wondrous works, that he may go up from us.
Then Jeremiah said to them, Thus ye shall say to Zedekiah:
Thus says Jehovah, the God of Israel: Behold, I will turn back the weapons of war that are in your hands, with which ye fight against the king of Babylon,  against the Chaldeans who besiege you, outside the walls. And I will gather them into the midst of this city.
I myself will fight against you with an outstretched hand and with a strong arm, even in anger,  in wrath,  in great indignation.
I will smite the inhabitants of this city, both man and beast. They shall die of a great pestilence.
afterward, says Jehovah, I will deliver Zedekiah king of Judah,  his servants,  the people, even such as are left in this city from the pestilence, from the sword,  from the famine, into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon,  into the hand of their enemies,  into the hand of those who seek their life,  he shall smite them with the edge of the sword. He shall not spare them, nor have pity, nor have mercy.
thou shall say to this people, Thus says Jehovah: Behold, I set before you the way of life and the way of death.
He who abides in this city shall die by the sword,  by the famine,  by the pestilence. But he who goes out,  passes over to the Chaldeans who besiege you, he shall live,  his life shall be to him for a prey.
For I have set my face upon this city for evil,  not for good, says Jehovah. It shall be given into the hand of the king of Babylon,  he shall burn it with fire.
concerning the house of the king of Judah, hear ye the word of Jehovah.
O house of David, thus says Jehovah: Execute justice in the morning,  deliver him who is robbed out of the hand of the oppressor, lest my wrath go forth like fire,  burn so that none can quench it, because of the evil of your doings.
Behold, I am against thee, O inhabitant of the valley,  of the rock of the plain, says Jehovah, you who say, Who shall come down against us? Or who shall enter into our habitations?
I will punish you according to the fruit of your doings, says Jehovah. And I will kindle a fire in her forest,  it shall devour all that is round about her.
Thus said Jehovah: Go down to the house of the king of Judah,  speak there this word,
say, Hear the word of Jehovah, O king of Judah, who sits upon the throne of David, thou,  thy servants,  thy people who enter in by these gates.
Thus says Jehovah: Execute ye justice and righteousness. And deliver him who is robbed out of the hand of the oppressor. And do no wrong. Do no violence to the sojourner, the fatherless, nor the widow, neither shed innocent blood in this place.
For if ye do this thing indeed, then there shall enter in by the gates of this house kings sitting upon the throne of David, riding in chariots and on horses, he,  his servants,  his people.
But if ye will not hear these words, I swear by myself, says Jehovah, that this house shall become a desolation.
For thus says Jehovah concerning the house of the king of Judah: Thou are Gilead to me,  the head of Lebanon, yet surely I will make thee a wilderness, cities which are not inhabited.
I will prepare destroyers against thee, each one with his weapons,  they shall cut down thy choice cedars,  cast them into the fire.
many nations shall pass by this city,  they shall say each man to his neighbor, Why has Jehovah done thus to this great city?
Then they shall answer, Because they forsook the covenant of Jehovah their God,  worshiped other gods,  served them.
Weep ye not for him who is dead, nor bemoan him. But weep greatly for him who goes away, for he shall return no more, nor see his native country.
For thus says Jehovah concerning Shallum the son of Josiah, king of Judah, who reigned instead of Josiah his father,  who went forth out of this place: He shall not return there any more.
But in the place where they have led him captive, there he shall die,  he shall see this land no more.
Woe to him who builds his house by unrighteousness,  his chambers by injustice, who uses his neighbor's service without wages,  gives him not his hire,
who says, I will build me a wide house and spacious chambers,  cuts out windows for himself,  it is overlaid with cedar,  painted with vermilion.
Shall thou reign, because thou strive to excel in cedar? Did not thy father eat and drink,  do justice and righteousness? Then it was well with him.
He judged the cause of the poor and needy man, then it was well. Was not this to know me? says Jehovah.
But thine eyes and thy heart are not but for thy covetousness,  for shedding innocent blood,  for oppression,  for violence, to do it.
Therefore thus says Jehovah concerning Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah. They shall not lament for him, saying, Ah my brother! or, Ah sister! They shall not lament for him, saying Ah lord! or, Ah his glory!
He shall be buried with the burial of a donkey, drawn and cast forth beyond the gates of Jerusalem.
Go up to Lebanon,  cry. And lift up thy voice in Bashan,  cry from Abarim. For all thy lovers are destroyed.
I spoke to thee in thy prosperity,  thou said, I will not hear. This has been thy manner from thy youth, that thou obeyed not my voice.
The wind shall feed all thy shepherds,  thy loved ones shall go into captivity. Surely then thou shall be ashamed and confounded for all thy wickedness.
O inhabitant of Lebanon, who makes thy nest in the cedars, how greatly to be pitied thou shall be when pangs come upon thee, the pain as of a woman in travail!
As I live, says Jehovah, though Coniah the son of Jehoiakim king of Judah were the signet upon my right hand, yet I would pluck thee from there,
I will give thee into the hand of those who seek thy life,  into the hand of those of whom thou are afraid, even into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon,  into the hand of the Chaldeans.
I will cast thee out,  thy mother who bore thee, into another country where ye were not born,  there ye shall die.
But to the land to which their soul longs to return, there they shall not return.
Is this man Coniah a despised broken vessel? Is he a vessel in which none delights? Why are they cast out, he and his seed,  are cast into the land which they know not?
O earth, earth, earth, hear the word of Jehovah.
Thus says Jehovah: Write ye this man childless, a man who shall not prosper in his days. For no more shall a man of his seed prosper, sitting upon the throne of David,  ruling in Judah.
Woe to the shepherds who destroy and scatter the sheep of my pasture! says Jehovah.
Therefore thus says Jehovah, the God of Israel, against the shepherds who feed my people: Ye have scattered my flock,  driven them away,  have not visited them. Behold, I will visit upon you the evil of your doings, says Jehovah.
I will gather the remnant of my flock out of all the countries where I have driven them,  will bring them again to their folds,  they shall be fruitful and multiply.
I will set up shepherds over them who shall feed them. And they shall fear no more, nor be dismayed. Neither shall any be lacking, says Jehovah.
Behold, the days come, says Jehovah, that I will raise to David a righteous Branch,  he shall reign as king and deal wisely,  shall execute justice and righteousness in the land.
In his days Judah shall be saved,  Israel shall dwell safely. And this is his name by which he shall be called: Jehovah our righteousness.
Therefore, behold, the days come, says Jehovah, that they shall no more say, As Jehovah lives, who brought up the sons of Israel out of the land of Egypt,
but, As Jehovah lives, who brought up and who led the seed of the house of Israel out of the north country,  from all the countries where I had driven them. And they shall dwell in their own land.
Concerning the prophets: My heart within me is broken. All my bones shake. I am like a drunken man,  like a man whom wine has overcome, because of Jehovah,  because of his holy words.
For the land is full of adulterers. For because of swearing the land mourns. The pastures of the wilderness are dried up. And their course is evil,  their might is not right.
For both prophet and priest are profane. Yea, in my house I have found their wickedness, says Jehovah.
Therefore their way shall be to them as slippery places in the darkness. They shall be driven on,  fall in it. For I will bring evil upon them, even the year of their visitation, says Jehovah.
I have seen folly in the prophets of Samaria. They prophesied by Baal,  caused my people Israel to err.
In the prophets of Jerusalem also I have seen a horrible thing. They commit adultery,  walk in lies. And they strengthen the hands of evildoers, so that none returns from his wickedness. They have all of them become to me as Sodom,  the inhabitants thereof as Gomorrah.
Therefore thus says Jehovah of hosts concerning the prophets: Behold, I will feed them with wormwood,  make them drink the water of gall. For from the prophets of Jerusalem ungodliness has gone forth into all the land.
Thus says Jehovah of hosts: Hearken not to the words of the prophets who prophesy to you. They teach you vanity. They speak a vision of their own heart,  not out of the mouth of Jehovah.
They say continually to those who despise me, Jehovah has said, Ye shall have peace. And to everyone who walks in the stubbornness of his own heart they say, No evil shall come upon you.
For who has stood in the council of Jehovah, that he should perceive and hear his word? Who has marked my word,  heard it?
Behold, the tempest of Jehovah, wrath, has gone forth, yea, a whirling tempest. It shall burst upon the head of the wicked.
The anger of Jehovah shall not return until he has executed,  till he has performed the intents of his heart. In the latter days ye shall understand it perfectly.
I did not send these prophets, yet they ran. I did not speak to them, yet they prophesied.
But if they had stood in my council, then they would have caused my people to hear my words,  would have turned them from their evil way,  from the evil of their doings.
Am I a God at hand, says Jehovah,  not a God afar off?
Can any man hide himself in secret places so that I shall not see him? says Jehovah. Do I not fill heaven and earth? says Jehovah.
I have heard what the prophets have said, who prophesy lies in my name, saying, I have dreamed, I have dreamed.
How long shall this be in the heart of the prophets who prophesy lies, even the prophets of the deceit of their own heart?
Who think to cause my people to forget my name by their dreams which they tell every man to his neighbor, as their fathers forgot my name for Baal.
The prophet who has a dream, let him tell a dream. And he who has my word, let him speak my word faithfully. What is the straw to the wheat? says Jehovah.
Is not my word like fire? says Jehovah,  like a hammer that breaks the rock in pieces?
Therefore, behold, I am against the prophets, says Jehovah, who steal my words each one from his neighbor.
Behold, I am against the prophets, says Jehovah, who use their tongues,  say, He says.
Behold, I am against those who prophesy lying dreams, says Jehovah,  tell them. And cause my people to err by their lies,  by their vain boasting. Yet I sent them not, nor commanded them, neither do they profit this people at all, says Jehovah.
when this people, or the prophet, or a priest, shall ask thee, saying, What is the burden of Jehovah? Then thou shall say to them, What burden! I will cast you off, says Jehovah.
as for the prophet,  the priest,  the people, who shall say, The burden of Jehovah, I will even punish that man and his house.
Thus ye shall say each one to his neighbor,  each one to his brother: What has Jehovah answered? and, What has Jehovah spoken?
the burden of Jehovah ye shall mention no more, for every man's own word shall be his burden. For ye have perverted the words of the living God, of Jehovah of hosts our God.
Thus thou shall say to the prophet: What has Jehovah answered thee? and, What has Jehovah spoken?
But if ye say, The burden of Jehovah, therefore thus says Jehovah: Because ye say this word, The burden of Jehovah,  I have sent to you, saying, Ye shall not say, The burden of Jehovah,
therefore, behold, I will utterly forget you. And I will cast you off,  the city that I gave to you and to your fathers, away from my presence.
I will bring an everlasting reproach upon you,  a perpetual shame, which shall not be forgotten.
Jehovah showed me, , behold, two baskets of figs set before the temple of Jehovah, after Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon had carried away captive Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim, king of Judah,  the rulers of Judah, with the craftsmen and smiths, from Jerusalem,  had brought them to Babylon.
One basket had very good figs, like the figs that are first ripe,  the other basket had very bad figs, which could not be eaten they were so bad.
Then Jehovah said to me, What do thou see, Jeremiah? And I said, Figs. The good figs, very good,  the bad, very bad, that cannot be eaten they are so bad.
the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Thus says Jehovah, the God of Israel: Like these good figs, so I will regard the captives of Judah, whom I have sent out of this place into the land of the Chaldeans, for good.
For I will set my eyes upon them for good,  I will bring them again to this land. And I will build them,  not pull them down,  I will plant them,  not pluck them up.
I will give them a heart to know me, that I am Jehovah. And they shall be my people,  I will be their God, for they shall return to me with their whole heart.
as the bad figs, which cannot be eaten they are so bad, surely thus says Jehovah: So will I give up Zedekiah the king of Judah,  his rulers,  the residue of Jerusalem, who remain in this land,  those who dwell in the land of Egypt.
I will even give them up to be tossed to and fro among all the kingdoms of the earth for evil, to be a reproach and a proverb, a taunt and a curse, in all places where I shall drive them.
I will send the sword, the famine,  the pestilence, among them, till they be consumed from off the land that I gave to them and to their fathers.
The word that came to Jeremiah concerning all the people of Judah, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah (the same was the first year of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon),
which Jeremiah the prophet spoke to all the people of Judah,  to all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying,
From the thirteenth year of Josiah the son of Amon, king of Judah, even to this day, these twenty-three years, the word of Jehovah has come to me,  I have spoken to you, rising up early and speaking. But ye have not hearkened.
Jehovah has sent to you all his servants the prophets, rising up early and sending them, (but ye have not hearkened, nor inclined your ear to hear),
saying, Return ye now each one from his evil way,  from the evil of your doings,  dwell in the land that Jehovah has given to you and to your fathers, from of old and even for evermore.
go not after other gods to serve them,  to worship them,  provoke me not to anger with the work of your hands. And I will do you no hurt.
Yet ye have not hearkened to me, says Jehovah, that ye may provoke me to anger with the work of your hands to your own hurt.
Therefore thus says Jehovah of hosts: Because ye have not heard my words,
behold, I will send and take all the families of the north, says Jehovah,  Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon, my servant,  will bring them against this land,  against the inhabitants of it,  against all these nations round about. And I will utterly destroy them,  make them an astonishment,  a hissing,  perpetual desolations.
Moreover I will take from them the voice of mirth and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride, the sound of the millstones,  the light of the lamp.
this whole land shall be a desolation,  an astonishment. And these nations shall serve the king of Babylon seventy years.
it shall come to pass, when seventy years are accomplished, that I will punish the king of Babylon,  that nation, says Jehovah, for their iniquity,  the land of the Chaldeans,  I will make it desolate forever.
I will bring upon that land all my words which I have pronounced against it, even all that is written in this book, which Jeremiah has prophesied against all the nations.
For many nations and great kings shall make bondmen of them, even of them,  I will recompense them according to their deeds,  according to the work of their hands.
For thus says Jehovah, the God of Israel, to me: Take this cup of the wine of wrath at my hand,  cause all the nations, to whom I send thee, to drink it.
they shall drink,  reel to and fro,  be mad, because of the sword that I will send among them.
Then I took the cup at Jehovah's hand,  made all the nations to drink, to whom Jehovah had sent me:
Jerusalem,  the cities of Judah,  the kings of it,  the rulers of it, to make them a desolation, an astonishment, a hissing,  a curse, as it is this day,
Pharaoh king of Egypt,  his servants,  his rulers,  all his people,
all the mixed people,  all the kings of the land of the Uz,  all the kings of the Philistines,  Ashkelon,  Gaza,  Ekron,  the remnant of Ashdod,
Edom,  Moab,  the sons of Ammon,
all the kings of Tyre,  all the kings of Sidon,  the kings of the isle which is beyond the sea,
Dedan,  Tema,  Buz,  all who have the corners of their hair cut off,
all the kings of Arabia,  all the kings of the mixed people who dwell in the wilderness,
all the kings of Zimri,  all the kings of Elam,  all the kings of the Medes,
all the kings of the north, far and near, one with another,  all the kingdoms of the world, which are upon the face of the earth. And the king of Sheshach shall drink after them.
thou shall say to them, Thus says Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: Drink ye,  be drunken,  spew,  fall,  rise no more, because of the sword which I will send among you.
it shall be, if they refuse to take the cup at thy hand to drink, then thou shall say to them, Thus says Jehovah of hosts: Ye shall surely drink.
For, lo, I begin to work evil at the city which is called by my name,  should ye be utterly unpunished? Ye shall not be unpunished. For I will call for a sword upon all the inhabitants of the earth, says Jehovah of hosts.
Therefore prophesy thou against them all these words,  say to them, Jehovah will roar from on high,  utter his voice from his holy habitation. He will mightily roar against his fold. He will give a shout, as those who tread grapes, against all the inhabitants of the earth.
A noise shall come even to the end of the earth, for Jehovah has a controversy with the nations. He will enter into judgment with all flesh. As for the wicked, he will give them to the sword, says Jehovah.
Thus says Jehovah of hosts: Behold, evil shall go forth from nation to nation,  a great tempest shall be raised up from the outermost parts of the earth.
the slain of Jehovah shall be at that day from one end of the earth even to the other end of the earth. They shall not be lamented, nor gathered, nor buried; they shall be dung upon the face of the ground.
Wail, ye shepherds,  cry. And wallow, ye principal men of the flock. For the days of your slaughter and of your dispersions have fully come,  ye shall fall like a goodly vessel.
the shepherds shall have no way to flee, nor the principal men of the flock to escape.
A voice of the cry of the shepherds,  the wailing of the principal men of the flock! For Jehovah lays waste their pasture.
the peaceable folds are brought to silence because of the fierce anger of Jehovah.
He has left his covert as the lion. For their land has become an astonishment because of the fierceness of the oppressing sword,  because of his fierce anger.
In the beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah, this word from Jehovah came, saying,
Thus says Jehovah: Stand in the court of Jehovah's house,  speak to all the cities of Judah, which come to worship in Jehovah's house, all the words that I command thee to speak to them, diminish not a word.
It may be they will hearken,  turn every man from his evil way, that I may relent of the evil which I purpose to do to them because of the evil of their doings.
thou shall say to them, Thus says Jehovah: If ye will not hearken to me, to walk in my law, which I have set before you,
to hearken to the words of my servants the prophets, whom I send to you, even rising up early and sending them,  ye have not hearkened,
then I will make this house like Shiloh,  will make this city a curse to all the nations of the earth.
the priests and the prophets and all the people heard Jeremiah speaking these words in the house of Jehovah.
it came to pass, when Jeremiah had made an end of speaking all that Jehovah had commanded him to speak to all the people, that the priests and the prophets and all the people laid hold on him, saying, Thou shall surely die.
Why have thou prophesied in the name of Jehovah, saying, This house shall be like Shiloh,  this city shall be desolate, without inhabitant? And all the people were gathered to Jeremiah in the house of Jehovah.
when the rulers of Judah heard these things, they came up from the king's house to the house of Jehovah,  they sat in the entry of the new gate of Jehovah's house.
Then the priests and the prophets spoke to the rulers and to all the people, saying, This man is worthy of death, for he has prophesied against this city, as ye have heard with your ears.
Then Jeremiah spoke to all the rulers and to all the people, saying, Jehovah sent me to prophesy against this house and against this city all the words that ye have heard.
Now therefore amend your ways and your doings,  obey the voice of Jehovah your God,  Jehovah will relent of the evil that he has pronounced against you.
But as for me, behold, I am in your hand. Do with me as is good and right in your eyes.
Only know ye for certain that, if ye put me to death, ye will bring innocent blood upon yourselves,  upon this city,  upon the inhabitants of it. For of a truth Jehovah has sent me to you to speak all these words in your ears.
Then the rulers and all the people said to the priests and to the prophets. This man is not worthy of death, for he has spoken to us in the name of Jehovah our God.
Then certain of the elders of the land rose up,  spoke to all the assembly of the people, saying,
Micah the Morashtite prophesied in the days of Hezekiah king of Judah,  he spoke to all the people of Judah, saying, Thus says Jehovah of hosts: Zion shall be plowed as a field,  Jerusalem shall become heaps,  the mountain of the house as the high places of a forest.
Did Hezekiah king of Judah,  all Judah put him to death? Did he not fear Jehovah,  entreat the favor of Jehovah. And Jehovah relented of the evil which he had pronounced against them? Thus might we commit great evil against our own souls.
there was also a man who prophesied in the name of Jehovah, Uriah the son of Shemaiah of Kiriath-jearim. And he prophesied against this city and against this land according to all the words of Jeremiah.
when Jehoiakim the king, with all his mighty men,  all the rulers, heard his words, the king sought to put him to death,  when Uriah heard it, he was afraid,  fled,  went into Egypt.
Jehoiakim the king sent men into Egypt, namely, Elnathan the son of Achbor,  certain men with him, into Egypt,
they fetched forth Uriah out of Egypt,  brought him to Jehoiakim the king, who killed him with the sword,  cast his dead body into the graves of the common people.
But the hand of Ahikam the son of Shaphan was with Jeremiah, that they should not give him into the hand of the people to put him to death.
In the beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah, this word came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying,
Thus says Jehovah to me: Make thee bonds and bars,  put them upon thy neck.
send them to the king of Edom,  to the king of Moab,  to the king of the sons of Ammon,  to the king of Tyre,  to the king of Sidon, by the hand of the messengers who come to Jerusalem to Zedekiah king of Judah.
give them a charge to their masters, saying, Thus says Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: Thus ye shall say to your masters:
I have made the earth, the men and the beasts that are upon the face of the earth, by my great power and by my outstretched arm,  I give it to whom it seems right to me.
now I have given all these lands into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon, my servant. And the beasts of the field I have also given him to serve him.
all the nations shall serve him,  his son,  his son's son, until the time of his own land comes. And then many nations and great kings shall make him their bondman.
it shall come to pass, that the nation and the kingdom which will not serve the same Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon,  that will not put their neck under the yoke of the king of Babylon, that nation I will punish, says Jehovah, with the sword,  with the famine,  with the pestilence, until I have consumed them by his hand.
But as for you, hearken ye not to your prophets, nor to your diviners, nor to your dreams, nor to your soothsayers, nor to your sorcerers, who speak to you, saying, Ye shall not serve the king of Babylon.
For they prophesy a lie to you, to remove you far from your land,  that I should drive you out,  ye should perish.
But the nation that shall bring their neck under the yoke of the king of Babylon,  serve him, that nation I will let remain in their own land, says Jehovah,  they shall till it,  dwell therein.
I spoke to Zedekiah king of Judah according to all these words, saying, Bring your necks under the yoke of the king of Babylon,  serve him and his people,  live.
Why will ye die, thou and thy people, by the sword, by the famine,  by the pestilence, as Jehovah has spoken concerning the nation that will not serve the king of Babylon?
hearken not to the words of the prophets who speak to you, saying, Ye shall not serve the king of Babylon, for they prophesy a lie to you.
For I have not sent them, says Jehovah,  they prophesy falsely in my name, that I may drive you out,  that ye may perish, ye,  the prophets who prophesy to you.
Also I spoke to the priests and to all this people, saying, Thus says Jehovah: Hearken not to the words of your prophets who prophesy to you, saying, Behold, the vessels of Jehovah's house shall now shortly be brought again from Babylon, for they prophesy a lie to you.
Hearken not to them. Serve the king of Babylon,  live. Why should this city become a desolation?
But if they are prophets,  if the word of Jehovah is with them, let them now make intercession to Jehovah of hosts, that the vessels which are left in the house of Jehovah,  in the house of the king of Judah,  at Jerusalem, not go to Babylon.
For thus says Jehovah of hosts concerning the pillars,  concerning the sea,  concerning the stands,  concerning the residue of the vessels that are left in this city,
which Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon did not take when he carried away captive Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, from Jerusalem to Babylon,  all the nobles of Judah and Jerusalem.
Yea, thus says Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel, concerning the vessels that are left in the house of Jehovah,  in the house of the king of Judah,  at Jerusalem:
They shall be carried to Babylon,  there they shall be until the day that I visit them, says Jehovah. Then I will bring them up,  restore them to this place.
it came to pass the same year, in the beginning of the reign of Zedekiah king of Judah, in the fourth year, in the fifth month, that Hananiah the son of Azzur, the prophet, who was of Gibeon, spoke to me in the house of Jehovah, in the presence of the priests and of all the people, saying,
Thus speaks Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel, saying, I have broken the yoke of the king of Babylon.
Within two full years I will bring again into this place all the vessels of Jehovah's house that Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon took away from this place,  carried to Babylon.
I will bring again to this place Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, with all the captives of Judah, who went to Babylon, says Jehovah, for I will break the yoke of the king of Babylon.
Then the prophet Jeremiah said to the prophet Hananiah in the presence of the priests,  in the presence of all the people who stood in the house of Jehovah,
even the prophet Jeremiah said, Truly! Jehovah do so. Jehovah perform thy words which thou have prophesied, to bring again the vessels of Jehovah's house,  all those of the captivity, from Babylon to this place.
Nevertheless hear thou now this word that I speak in thine ears,  in the ears of all the people:
The prophets who have been before me and before thee of old prophesied against many countries,  against great kingdoms, of war,  of evil,  of pestilence.
The prophet who prophesies of peace, when the word of the prophet shall come to pass, then the prophet shall be known that Jehovah has truly sent him.
Then Hananiah the prophet took the bar from off the prophet Jeremiah's neck,  broke it.
Hananiah spoke in the presence of all the people, saying, Thus says Jehovah: Even so I will break the yoke of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon within two full years from off the neck of all the nations. And the prophet Jeremiah went his way.
Then the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah after Hananiah the prophet had broken the bar from off the neck of the prophet Jeremiah, saying,
Go,  tell Hananiah, saying, Thus says Jehovah: Thou have broken the bars of wood,  I have made in their stead bars of iron.
For thus says Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: I have put a yoke of iron upon the neck of all these nations, that they may served Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon,  they shall serve him. And I have given him the beasts of the field also.
Then the prophet Jeremiah said to Hananiah the prophet, Hear now, Hananiah. Jehovah has not sent thee,  thou make this people to trust in a lie.
Therefore thus says Jehovah, Behold, I will send thee away from off the face of the earth. This year thou shall die because thou have spoken rebellion against Jehovah.
So Hananiah the prophet died the same year in the seventh month.
Now these are the words of the letter that Jeremiah the prophet sent from Jerusalem to the residue of the elders of the captivity,  to the priests,  to the prophets,  to all the people, whom Nebuchadnezzar had carried away captive from Jerusalem to Babylon,
after Jeconiah the king,  the queen-mother,  the eunuchs,  the rulers of Judah and Jerusalem,  the craftsmen,  the smiths, were departed from Jerusalem),
by the hand of Elasah the son of Shaphan,  Gemariah the son of Hilkiah, (whom Zedekiah king of Judah sent to Babylon to Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon), saying,
Thus says Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel, to all the captivity whom I have caused to be carried away captive from Jerusalem to Babylon:
Build ye houses,  dwell in them,  plant gardens,  eat the fruit of them.
Take ye wives,  beget sons and daughters. And take wives for your sons,  give your daughters to husbands, that they may bear sons and daughters,  multiply ye there,  be not diminished.
seek the peace of the city where I have caused you to be carried away captive,  pray to Jehovah for it, for in the peace of it ye shall have peace.
For thus says Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: Let not your prophets who are in the midst of you,  your diviners, deceive you, nor hearken ye to your dreams which ye cause to be dreamed.
For they prophesy falsely to you in my name. I have not sent them, says Jehovah.
For thus says Jehovah, After seventy years are accomplished for Babylon, I will visit you,  perform my good word toward you in causing you to return to this place.
For I know the thoughts that I think toward you, says Jehovah, thoughts of peace,  not of evil, to give you hope in your latter end.
ye shall call upon me,  ye shall go and pray to me,  I will hearken to you.
ye shall seek me,  find me when ye shall search for me with all your heart.
I will be found by you, says Jehovah,  I will turn again your captivity. And I will gather you from all the nations,  from all the places where I have driven you, says Jehovah,  I will bring you again to the place from where I caused you to be carried away captive.
Because ye have said, Jehovah has raised us up prophets in Babylon,
thus says Jehovah concerning the king who sits upon the throne of David,  concerning all the people who dwell in this city, your brothers who have not gone forth with you into captivity,
thus says Jehovah of hosts: Behold, I will send upon them the sword, the famine,  the pestilence,  will make them like vile figs, that cannot be eaten they are so bad.
I will pursue after them with the sword, with the famine,  with the pestilence,  will deliver them to be tossed to and fro among all the kingdoms of the earth, to be an execration,  an astonishment,  a hissing,  a reproach, among all the nations where I have driven them,
because they have not hearkened to my words, says Jehovah, with which I sent to them my servants the prophets, rising up early and sending them. But ye would not hear, says Jehovah.
Hear ye therefore the word of Jehovah, all ye of the captivity whom I have sent away from Jerusalem to Babylon.
Thus says Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel, concerning Ahab the son of Kolaiah,  concerning Zedekiah the son of Maaseiah, who prophesy a lie to you in my name. Behold, I will deliver them into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon,  he shall kill them before your eyes.
of them shall be taken up a curse by all the captives of Judah that are in Babylon, saying, Jehovah make thee like Zedekiah and like Ahab, whom the king of Babylon roasted in the fire,
because they have wrought folly in Israel,  have committed adultery with their neighbors' wives,  have spoken words in my name falsely, which I did not command them. And I am he who knows,  am witness, says Jehovah.
concerning Shemaiah the Nehelamite thou shall speak, saying,
Thus speaks Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel, saying, Because thou have sent letters in thine own name to all the people who are at Jerusalem,  to Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah, the priest,  to all the priests, saying,
Jehovah has made thee priest in the stead of Jehoiada the priest, that there may be officers in the house of Jehovah, for every man who is mad,  makes himself a prophet, that thou should put him in the stocks and in shackles.
Now therefore, why have thou not rebuked Jeremiah of Anathoth, who makes himself a prophet to you,
inasmuch as he has sent to us in Babylon, saying, It is long. Build ye houses,  dwell in them,  plant gardens,  eat the fruit of them?
Zephaniah the priest read this letter in the ears of Jeremiah the prophet.
Then the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah, saying,
Send to all those of the captivity, saying, Thus says Jehovah concerning Shemaiah the Nehelamite: Because Shemaiah has prophesied to you,  I did not send him,  he has caused you to trust in a lie,
therefore thus says Jehovah: Behold, I will punish Shemaiah the Nehelamite,  his seed. He shall not have a man to dwell among this people, nor shall he behold the good that I will do to my people, says Jehovah, because he has spoken rebellion against Jehovah.
The word that came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying,
Thus speaks Jehovah, the God of Israel, saying, Write thee all the words that I have spoken to thee in a book.
For, lo, the days come, says Jehovah, that I will turn again the captivity of my people Israel and Judah, says Jehovah,  I will cause them to return to the land that I gave to their fathers,  they shall possess it.
these are the words that Jehovah spoke concerning Israel and concerning Judah.
For thus says Jehovah: We have heard a voice of trembling, of fear,  not of peace.
Ask ye now,  see whether a man travails with child. Why do I see every man with his hands on his loins as a woman in travail,  all faces are turned into paleness?
Alas! For that day is great, so that none is like it. It is even the time of Jacob's trouble,  he shall be saved out of it.
it shall come to pass in that day, says Jehovah of hosts, that I will break his yoke from off thy neck,  will burst thy bonds. And strangers shall no more make him their bondman,
but they shall serve Jehovah their God,  David their king, whom I will raise up to them.
Therefore fear thou not, O Jacob my servant, says Jehovah, nor be dismayed, O Israel. For, lo, I will save thee from afar,  thy seed from the land of their captivity,  Jacob shall return,  shall be quiet and at ease,  none shall make him afraid.
For I am with thee, says Jehovah, to save thee. For I will make a full end of all the nations where I have scattered thee,  I will not make a full end of thee. But I will correct thee in measure,  will in no way leave thee unpunished.
For thus says Jehovah, Thy hurt is incurable,  thy wound grievous.
There is none to plead thy cause, that thou may be bound up; thou have no healing medicines.
All who love thee have forgotten thee; they seek thee not. For I have wounded thee with the wound of an enemy, with the chastisement of a cruel one, for the greatness of thine iniquity, because thy sins were increased.
Why do thou cry for thy hurt? Thy pain is incurable, for the greatness of thine iniquity. Because thy sins were increased, I have done these things to thee.
Therefore all those who devour thee shall be devoured,  all thine adversaries, every one of them, shall go into captivity. And those who despoil thee shall be a spoil,  all who prey upon thee I will give for a prey.
For I will restore health to thee,  I will heal thee of thy wounds, says Jehovah, because they have called thee an outcast, saying, It is Zion, whom no man seeks after.
Thus says Jehovah: Behold, I will turn again the captivity of Jacob's tents,  have compassion on his dwelling-places. And the city shall be built upon its own hill,  the palace shall be inhabited after its own manner.
out of them shall proceed thanksgiving and the voice of those who make merry. And I will multiply them,  they shall not be few. I will also glorify them,  they shall not be small.
Their sons also shall be as formerly,  their congregation shall be established before me. And I will punish all who oppress them.
their prince shall be of themselves,  their ruler shall proceed from the midst of them. And I will cause him to draw near,  he shall approach to me. For who is he who has had boldness to approach to me? says Jehovah.
ye shall be my people,  I will be your God.
Behold, the tempest of Jehovah-wrath-has gone forth, a sweeping tempest. It shall burst upon the head of the wicked.
The fierce anger of Jehovah shall not return until he has executed,  till he has performed the intents of his heart. In the latter days ye shall understand it.
At that time, says Jehovah, I will be the God of all the families of Israel,  they shall be my people.
Thus says Jehovah: The people who were left of the sword found favor in the wilderness, even Israel, when I went to cause him to rest.
Jehovah appeared of old to me, saying, Yea, I have loved thee with an everlasting love. Therefore with loving kindness I have drawn thee.
Again I will build thee,  thou shall be built, O virgin of Israel. Again thou shall be adorned with thy tambourine,  shall go forth in the dances of those who make merry.
Again thou shall plant vineyards upon the mountains of Samaria. The planters shall plant,  shall enjoy it.
For there shall be a day that the watchmen upon the hills of Ephraim shall cry, Arise ye,  let us go up to Zion to Jehovah our God.
For thus says Jehovah: Sing with gladness for Jacob,  shout for the chief of the nations. Publish ye, praise ye,  say, O Jehovah, save thy people, the remnant of Israel.
Behold, I will bring them from the north country,  gather them from the outermost parts of the earth,  with them the blind man and the lame man, the woman with child,  she who travails with child together. They shall return here a great company.
They shall come with weeping. And I will lead them with supplications. I will cause them to walk by rivers of waters, in a straight way in which they shall not stumble. For I am a father to Israel,  Ephraim is my firstborn.
Hear the word of Jehovah, O ye nations,  declare it in the isles afar off,  say, He who scattered Israel will gather him,  keep him, as a shepherd does his flock.
For Jehovah has ransomed Jacob,  redeemed him from the hand of him who was stronger than he.
they shall come and sing in the height of Zion,  shall flow to the goodness of Jehovah, to the grain,  to the new wine,  to the oil,  to the young of the flock and of the herd. And their soul shall be as a watered garden,  they shall not sorrow any more at all.
Then the virgin shall rejoice in the dance,  the young men and the old together, for I will turn their mourning into joy,  will comfort them,  make them rejoice from their sorrow.
I will satiate the soul of the priests with fatness,  my people shall be satisfied with my goodness, says Jehovah.
Thus says Jehovah: A voice is heard in Ramah, lamentation,  bitter weeping. Rachel weeping for her children, she refused to be comforted for her children, because they are not.
Thus says Jehovah: Refrain thy voice from weeping,  thine eyes from tears, for thy work shall be rewarded, says Jehovah,  they shall come again from the land of the enemy.
there is hope for thy latter end, says Jehovah,  thy sons shall come again to their own border.
I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself saying, Thou have chastised me,  I was chastised as a calf unaccustomed to the yoke. Turn thou me back,  I shall be turned back, for thou are Jehovah my God.
Surely after that I was turned back. I repented,  after I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh. I was ashamed, yea, even confounded, because I bore the reproach of my youth.
Is Ephraim my dear son? Is he a darling child? For as often as I speak against him, I do earnestly remember him still. Therefore my heart yearns for him. I will surely have mercy upon him, says Jehovah.
Set thee up road marks. Make thee guideposts. Set thy heart toward the highway, even the way by which thou went. Turn again, O virgin of Israel, turn again to these thy cities.
How long will thou go here and there, O thou backsliding daughter? For Jehovah has created a new thing in the earth: a woman shall encompass a man.
Thus says Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: Yet again they shall use this speech in the land of Judah and in the cities thereof when I shall bring again their captivity: Jehovah bless thee, O habitation of righteousness, O mountain of holiness.
Judah and all the cities thereof shall dwell in there together, the husbandmen,  those who go about with flocks.
For I have satiated the weary soul,  every sorrowful soul I have replenished.
Upon this I awoke,  beheld,  my sleep was sweet to me.
Behold, the days come, says Jehovah, that I will sow the house of Israel and the house of Judah with the seed of man,  with the seed of beast.
it shall come to pass that, just as I have watched over them to pluck up and to break down and to overthrow and to destroy and to afflict, so I will watch over them to build and to plant, says Jehovah.
In those days they shall no more say, The fathers have eaten sour grapes,  the son's teeth are set on edge.
But everyone shall die for his own iniquity. Every man who eats the sour grapes, his teeth shall be set on edge.
Behold, the days come, says Jehovah, that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel,  with the house of Judah,
not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers in the day that I took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt, because they did not continue in my covenant,  I disregarded them, says Jehovah.
But this is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those days, says Jehovah: I will give my laws into their mind,  I will write them on their hearts. And I will be their God,  they shall be my people.
they shall teach no more every man his neighbor,  every man his brother, saying, Know Jehovah, for they shall all know me, from the least of them to the greatest of them, says Jehovah. For I will forgive their iniquity,  I will remember their sin no more.
Thus says Jehovah, who gives the sun for a light by day,  the ordinances of the moon and of the stars for a light by night, who stirs up the sea, so that the waves thereof roar. Jehovah of hosts is his name.
If these ordinances depart from before me, says Jehovah, then the seed of Israel also shall cease from being a nation before me forever.
Thus says Jehovah: If heaven above can be measured,  the foundations of the earth searched out beneath, then I will also cast off all the seed of Israel for all that they have done, says Jehovah.
Behold, the days come, says Jehovah, that the city shall be built to Jehovah from the tower of Hananel to the gate of the corner.
the measuring line shall go out further straight onward to the hill Gareb,  shall turn about to Goah.
the whole valley of the dead bodies and of the ashes,  all the fields, to the brook Kidron, to the corner of the horse gate toward the east, shall be holy to Jehovah. It shall not be plucked up, nor thrown down any more forever.
The word that came to Jeremiah from Jehovah in the tenth year of Zedekiah, king of Judah, which was the eighteenth year of Nebuchadrezzar.
Now at that time the king of Babylon's army was besieging Jerusalem,  Jeremiah the prophet was shut up in the court of the guard, which was in the king of Judah's house.
For Zedekiah king of Judah had shut him up, saying, Why do thou prophesy,  say, Thus says Jehovah: Behold, I will give this city into the hand of the king of Babylon,  he shall take it.
Zedekiah king of Judah shall not escape out of the hand of the Chaldeans,  shall surely be delivered into the hand of the king of Babylon,  shall speak with him mouth to mouth,  his eyes shall behold his eyes.
he shall bring Zedekiah to Babylon,  there he shall be until I visit him, says Jehovah. Though ye fight with the Chaldeans, ye shall not prosper?
Jeremiah said, The word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Behold, Hanamel the son of Shallum thine uncle shall come to thee, saying, Buy thee my field that is in Anathoth. For the right of redemption is thine to buy it.
So Hanamel my uncle's son came to me in the court of the guard according to the word of Jehovah,  said to me, Buy my field, I pray thee, that is in Anathoth, which is in the land of Benjamin. For the right of inheritance is thine,  the redemption is thine. Buy it for thyself. Then I knew that this was the word of Jehovah.
I bought the field that was in Anathoth of Hanamel my uncle's son,  weighed him the money, even seventeen shekels of silver.
I signed the deed,  sealed it,  called witnesses,  weighed him the money in the balances.
So I took the deed of the purchase, both that which was sealed, according to the law and custom,  that which was open,
I delivered the deed of the purchase to Baruch the son of Neriah, the son of Mahseiah, in the presence of Hanamel my uncle's son,  in the presence of the witnesses who signed the deed of the purchase, before all the Jews who sat in the court of the guard.
I charged Baruch before them, saying,
Thus says Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: Take these deeds, this deed of the purchase which is sealed,  this deed which is open,  put them in an earthen vessel that they may continue many days.
For thus says Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: Houses and fields and vineyards shall yet again be bought in this land.
Now after I had delivered the deed of the purchase to Baruch the son of Neriah, I prayed to Jehovah, saying,
Ah lord Jehovah! Behold, thou have made the heavens and the earth by thy great power and by thine outstretched arm. There is nothing too hard for thee,
who show loving kindness to thousands,  recompense the iniquity of the fathers into the bosom of their sons after them, the great, the mighty God. Jehovah of hosts is his name,
great in counsel,  mighty in work, whose eyes are open upon all the ways of the sons of men, to give everyone according to his ways,  according to the fruit of his doings,
who set signs and wonders in the land of Egypt, even to this day, both in Israel and among other men,  made thee a name, as at this day,
brought forth thy people Israel out of the land of Egypt with signs,  with wonders,  with a strong hand,  with an outstretched arm,  with great terror,
gave them this land, which thou swore to their fathers to give them, a land flowing with milk and honey.
they came in,  possessed it,  they obeyed not thy voice, nor walked in thy law. They have done nothing of all that thou commanded them to do. Therefore thou have caused all this evil to come upon them.
Behold, the mounds. They have come to the city to take it. And the city is given into the hand of the Chaldeans who fight against it, because of the sword,  of the famine,  of the pestilence. And what thou have spoken has come to pass, , behold, thou see it.
thou have said to me, O lord Jehovah, Buy thee the field for money,  call witnesses, whereas the city is given into the hand of the Chaldeans.
Then the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah, saying,
Behold, I am Jehovah, the God of all flesh. Is there anything too hard for me?
Therefore thus says Jehovah: Behold, I will give this city into the hand of the Chaldeans,  into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon,  he shall take it.
the Chaldeans, who fight against this city, shall come and set this city on fire,  burn it, with the houses upon whose roofs they have offered incense to Baal,  poured out drink offerings to other gods, to provoke me to anger.
For the sons of Israel and the sons of Judah have done only that which was evil in my sight from their youth. For the sons of Israel have only provoked me to anger with the work of their hands, says Jehovah.
For this city has been to me a provocation of my anger and of my wrath from the day that they built it even to this day, that I should remove it from before my face,
because of all the evil of the sons of Israel and of the sons of Judah, which they have done to provoke me to anger, they, their kings, their rulers, their priests,  their prophets,  the men of Judah,  the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
they have turned the back to me,  not the face. And though I taught them, rising up early and teaching them, yet they have not hearkened to receive instruction.
But they set their abominations in the house which is called by my name, to defile it.
they built the high places of Baal, which are in the valley of the son of Hinnom, to cause their sons and their daughters to pass through the fire to Molech, which I did not command them, nor did it come into my mind, that they should do this abomination, to cause Judah to sin.
now therefore thus says Jehovah, the God of Israel, concerning this city, of which ye say, It is given into the hand of the king of Babylon by the sword,  by the famine,  by the pestilence:
Behold, I will gather them out of all the countries where I have driven them in my anger,  in my wrath,  in great indignation. And I will bring them again to this place,  I will cause them to dwell safely.
they shall be my people,  I will be their God.
I will give them one heart and one way, that they may fear me forever, for the good of them,  of their sons after them.
I will make an everlasting covenant with them, that I will not turn away from following them, to do them good. And I will put my fear in their hearts, that they may not depart from me.
Yea, I will rejoice over them to do them good. And I will plant them in this land assuredly with my whole heart and with my whole soul.
For thus says Jehovah: Just as I have brought all this great evil upon this people, so I will bring upon them all the good that I have promised them.
fields shall be bought in this land, of which ye say, It is desolate, without man or beast. It is given into the hand of the Chaldeans.
Men shall buy fields for money,  sign the deeds,  seal them,  call witnesses, in the land of Benjamin,  in the places around Jerusalem,  in the cities of Judah,  in the cities of the hill-country,  in the cities of the lowland,  in the cities of the South. For I will cause their captivity to return, says Jehovah.
Moreover the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah the second time, while he was yet shut up in the court of the guard, saying,
Thus says Jehovah who does it, Jehovah who forms it to establish it; Jehovah is his name:
Call to me,  I will answer thee,  will show thee great things,  difficult, which thou know not.
For thus says Jehovah, the God of Israel, concerning the houses of this city,  concerning the houses of the kings of Judah, which are broken down to defend against the mounds and against the sword,
while men come to fight with the Chaldeans,  to fill them with the dead bodies of men, whom I have slain in my anger and in my wrath,  for all whose wickedness I have hid my face from this city:
Behold, I will bring it health and cure,  I will cure them. And I will reveal to them abundance of peace and truth.
I will cause the captivity of Judah and the captivity of Israel to return,  will build them as at the first.
I will cleanse them from all their iniquity by which they have sinned against me. And I will pardon all their iniquities by which they have sinned against me,  by which they have transgressed against me.
this city shall be to me for a name of joy, for a praise and for a glory, before all the nations of the earth, which shall hear all the good that I do to them,  shall fear and tremble for all the good and for all the peace that I procure to it.
Thus says Jehovah: Yet again there shall be heard in this place-of which ye say, It is waste, without man and without beast, even in the cities of Judah,  in the streets of Jerusalem, that are desolate, without man and without inhabitant and without beast-
the voice of joy and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride, the voice of those who say, Give thanks to Jehovah of hosts, for Jehovah is good, for his loving kindness is forever,  of those who bring thanksgiving into the house of Jehovah. For I will cause the captivity of the land to return as at the first, says Jehovah.
Thus says Jehovah of hosts: Yet again there shall be in this place, which is waste, without man and without beast,  in all the cities thereof, a habitation of shepherds causing their flocks to lie down.
In the cities of the hill-country, in the cities of the lowland,  in the cities of the South,  in the land of Benjamin,  in the places around Jerusalem,  in the cities of Judah, the flocks shall again pass under the hands of him who numbers them, says Jehovah.
Behold, the days come, says Jehovah, that I will perform that good word which I have spoken concerning the house of Israel and concerning the house of Judah.
In those days,  at that time, I will cause a Branch of righteousness to grow up to David,  he shall execute justice and righteousness in the land.
In those days Judah shall be saved,  Jerusalem shall dwell safely. And this is the name whereby she shall be called: Jehovah our righteousness.
For thus says Jehovah: David shall never want a man to sit upon the throne of the house of Israel,
neither shall the priests the Levites want a man before me to offer burnt offerings,  to burn meal offerings,  to do sacrifice continually.
the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah, saying,
Thus says Jehovah: If ye can break my covenant of the day,  my covenant of the night, so that there shall not be day and night in their season,
then may also my covenant be broken with David my servant, that he shall not have a son to reign upon his throne,  with the Levites the priests, my ministers.
As the host of heaven cannot be numbered, neither the sand of the sea measured, so I will multiply the seed of David my servant,  the Levites that minister to me.
the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah, saying,
Consider thou not what this people have spoken, saying, The two families which Jehovah chose, he has cast them off? Thus they despise my people, that they should be no more a nation before them.
Thus says Jehovah: If my covenant of day and night stand not, if I have not appointed the ordinances of heaven and earth,
then I will also cast away the seed of Jacob,  of David my servant, so that I will not take of his seed to be rulers over the seed of Abraham, Isaac,  Jacob. For I will cause their captivity to return,  will have mercy on them.
The word which came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, when Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon and all his army and all the kingdoms of the earth that were under his dominion,  all the peoples, were fighting against Jerusalem,  against all the cities thereof, saying,
Thus says Jehovah, the God of Israel: Go,  speak to Zedekiah king of Judah,  tell him, Thus says Jehovah: Behold, I will give this city into the hand of the king of Babylon,  he shall burn it with fire.
thou shall not escape out of his hand,  shall surely be taken,  delivered into his hand. And thine eyes shall behold the eyes of the king of Babylon,  he shall speak with thee mouth to mouth,  thou shall go to Babylon.
Yet hear the word of Jehovah, O Zedekiah king of Judah. Thus says Jehovah concerning thee, Thou shall not die by the sword;
thou shall die in peace. And with the burnings of thy fathers, the former kings who were before thee, so shall they make a burning for thee. And they shall lament thee, saying, Ah lord! For I have spoken the word, says Jehovah.
Then Jeremiah the prophet spoke all these words to Zedekiah, king of Judah in Jerusalem,
when the king of Babylon's army was fighting against Jerusalem,  against all the cities of Judah that were left, against Lachish and against Azekah, for these alone remained of the cities of Judah, fortified cities.
The word that came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, after the king Zedekiah had made a covenant with all the people who were at Jerusalem, to proclaim liberty to them,
that every man should let his man-servant,  every man his maid-servant, who is a Hebrew or a Hebrewess, go free, that none should make bondmen of them, namely, of a Jew his brother.
all the rulers and all the people obeyed, who had entered into the covenant, that everyone should let his man-servant,  everyone his maid-servant, go free, that none should make bondmen of them any more. They obeyed,  let them go.
But afterwards they turned,  caused the servants and the handmaids, whom they had let go free, to return,  brought them into subjection for servants and for handmaids.
Therefore the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying,
Thus says Jehovah, the God of Israel: I made a covenant with your fathers in the day that I brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage, saying,
At the end of seven years ye shall let go every man his brother who is a Hebrew, who has been sold to thee,  has served thee six years. Thou shall let him go free from thee. But your fathers hearkened not to me, nor inclined their ear.
ye were now turned,  had done that which is right in my eyes, in proclaiming liberty every man to his neighbor. And ye had made a covenant before me in the house which is called by my name.
But ye turned and profaned my name,  caused every man his servant,  every man his handmaid, whom ye had let go free at their pleasure, to return. And ye brought them into subjection, to be to you for servants and for handmaids.
Therefore thus says Jehovah: Ye have not hearkened to me, to proclaim liberty, every man to his brother,  every man to his neighbor. Behold, I proclaim to you a liberty, says Jehovah-to the sword, to the pestilence,  to the famine. And I will make you to be tossed to and fro among all the kingdoms of the earth.
I will give the men who have transgressed my covenant, who have not performed the words of the covenant which they made before me, when they cut the calf in two and passed between the parts of it,
the rulers of Judah,  the rulers of Jerusalem, the eunuchs,  the priests,  all the people of the land, who passed between the parts of the calf,
I will even give them into the hand of their enemies,  into the hand of those who seek their life. And their dead bodies shall be for food to the birds of the heavens,  to the beasts of the earth.
I will give Zedekiah king of Judah,  his rulers, into the hand of their enemies,  into the hand of those who seek their life,  into the hand of the king of Babylon's army that has gone away from you.
Behold, I will command, says Jehovah,  cause them to return to this city. And they shall fight against it,  take it,  burn it with fire. And I will make the cities of Judah a desolation, without inhabitant.
The word which came to Jeremiah from Jehovah in the days of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah, saying,
Go to the house of the Rechabites,  speak to them,  bring them into the house of Jehovah, into one of the chambers,  give them wine to drink.
Then I took Jaazaniah the son of Jeremiah, the son of Habazziniah,  his brothers,  all his sons,  the whole house of the Rechabites.
I brought them into the house of Jehovah, into the chamber of the sons of Hanan the son of Igdaliah, the man of God, which was by the chamber of the rulers, which was above the chamber of Maaseiah the son of Shallum, the keeper of the threshold.
I set before the sons of the house of the Rechabites bowls full of wine,  cups,  I said to them, Drink ye wine.
But they said, We will drink no wine. For Jonadab the son of Rechab, our father, commanded us, saying, Ye shall drink no wine, neither ye, nor your sons, forever.
Neither shall ye build house, nor sow seed, nor plant vineyard, nor have any,  all your days ye shall dwell in tents, that ye may live many days in the land in which ye sojourn.
we have obeyed the voice of Jonadab the son of Rechab, our father, in all that he charged us, to drink no wine all our days, we, our wives, our sons, or our daughters,
nor to build houses for us to dwell in. Neither have we vineyard, nor field, nor seed,
but we have dwelt in tents,  have obeyed,  done according to all that Jonadab our father commanded us.
But it came to pass, when Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon came up into the land, that we said, Come,  let us go to Jerusalem for fear of the army of the Chaldeans,  for fear of the army of the Syrians. So we dwell at Jerusalem.
Then the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah, saying,
Thus says Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: Go,  say to the men of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, Will ye not receive instruction to hearken to my words? says Jehovah.
The words of Jonadab the son of Rechab, that he commanded his sons, not to drink wine, are performed. And to this day they drink none, for they obey their father's commandment. But I have spoken to you, rising up early and speaking,  ye have not hearkened to me.
I have also sent to you all my servants the prophets, rising up early and sending them, saying, Return ye now every man from his evil way,  amend your doings,  go not after other gods to serve them,  ye shall dwell in the land which I have given to you and to your fathers. But ye have not inclined your ear, nor hearkened to me.
Inasmuch as the sons of Jonadab the son of Rechab have performed the commandment of their father which he commanded them,  this people has not hearkened to me,
therefore thus says Jehovah, the God of hosts, the God of Israel: Behold, I will bring upon Judah and upon all the inhabitants of Jerusalem all the evil that I have pronounced against them, because I have spoken to them,  they have not heard,  I have called to them,  they have not answered.
Jeremiah said to the house of the Rechabites, Thus says Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: Because ye have obeyed the commandment of Jonadab your father,  kept all his precepts,  done according to all that he commanded you,
therefore thus says Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: Jonadab the son of Rechab shall not want a man to stand before me forever.
it came to pass in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah, that this word came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying,
Take thee a roll of a book,  write in it all the words that I have spoken to thee against Israel,  against Judah,  against all the nations, from the day I spoke to thee, from the days of Josiah, even to this day.
It may be that the house of Judah will hear all the evil which I purpose to do to them, that they may return every man from his evil way, that I may forgive their iniquity and their sin.
Then Jeremiah called Baruch the son of Neriah. And Baruch wrote from the mouth of Jeremiah all the words of Jehovah, which he had spoken to him, upon a roll of a book.
Jeremiah commanded Baruch, saying, I am shut up. I cannot go into the house of Jehovah.
Therefore go thou,  read in the roll, which thou have written from my mouth, the words of Jehovah in the ears of the people in Jehovah's house upon the fast-day. And also thou shall read them in the ears of all Judah who come out of their cities.
It may be they will present their supplication before Jehovah,  will return each one from his evil way, for great is the anger and the wrath that Jehovah has pronounced against this people.
Baruch the son of Neriah did according to all that Jeremiah the prophet commanded him, reading in the book the words of Jehovah in Jehovah's house.
Now it came to pass in the fifth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah, in the ninth month, that all the people in Jerusalem,  all the people who came from the cities of Judah to Jerusalem, proclaimed a fast before Jehovah.
Then Baruch read in the book the words of Jeremiah in the house of Jehovah, in the chamber of Gemariah the son of Shaphan, the scribe, in the upper court, at the entry of the new gate of Jehovah's house, in the ears of all the people.
when Micaiah the son of Gemariah, the son of Shaphan, had heard out of the book all the words of Jehovah,
he went down into the king's house, into the scribe's chamber. And, lo, all the rulers were sitting there: Elishama the scribe,  Delaiah the son of Shemaiah,  Elnathan the son of Achbor,  Gemariah the son of Shaphan,  Zedekiah the son of Hananiah,  all the rulers.
Then Micaiah declared to them all the words that he had heard when Baruch read the book in the ears of the people.
Therefore all the rulers sent Jehudi the son of Nethaniah, the son of Shelemiah, the son of Cushi, to Baruch, saying, Take in thy hand the roll from which thou have read in the ears of the people,  come. So Baruch the son of Neriah took the roll in his hand,  came to them.
they said to him, Sit down now,  read it in our ears. So Baruch read it in their ears.
Now it came to pass, when they had heard all the words, they turned in fear one toward another,  said to Baruch, We will surely tell the king of all these words.
they asked Baruch, saying, Tell us now, How did thou write all these words at his mouth?
Then Baruch answered them, He pronounced all these words to me with his mouth,  I wrote them with ink in the book.
Then the rulers said to Baruch, Go, hide thee, thou and Jeremiah,  let no man know where ye are.
they went in to the king into the court,  they had laid up the roll in the chamber of Elishama the scribe,  they told all the words in the ears of the king.
So the king sent Jehudi to fetch the roll,  he took it out of the chamber of Elishama the scribe. And Jehudi read it in the ears of the king,  in the ears of all the rulers who stood beside the king.
Now the king was sitting in the winter-house in the ninth month,  the brazier was burning before him.
it came to pass, when Jehudi had read three or four leaves, that the king cut it with the penknife,  cast it into the fire that was in the brazier, until all the roll was consumed in the fire that was in the brazier.
they were not afraid, nor tore their garments, neither the king, nor any of his servants who heard all these words.
Moreover Elnathan and Delaiah and Gemariah had made intercession to the king that he would not burn the roll,  he would not hear them.
the king commanded Jerahmeel the king's son,  Seraiah the son of Azriel,  Shelemiah the son of Abdeel, to take Baruch the scribe and Jeremiah the prophet,  Jehovah hid them.
Then the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah after the king had burned the roll,  the words which Baruch wrote at the mouth of Jeremiah, saying,
Take thee again another roll,  write in it all the former words that were in the first roll, which Jehoiakim the king of Judah has burned.
concerning Jehoiakim king of Judah thou shall say, Thus says Jehovah: Thou have burned this roll, saying, Why have thou written in it, saying, The king of Babylon shall certainly come and destroy this land,  shall cause to cease from there man and beast?
Therefore thus says Jehovah concerning Jehoiakim king of Judah: He shall have none to sit upon the throne of David. And his dead body shall be cast out in the day to the heat,  in the night to the frost.
I will punish him and his seed and his servants for their iniquity. And I will bring upon them,  upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem,  upon the men of Judah, all the evil that I have pronounced against them,  they did not hearken.
Then Jeremiah took another roll,  gave it to Baruch the scribe, the son of Neriah, who wrote in it from the mouth of Jeremiah all the words of the book which Jehoiakim king of Judah had burned in the fire,  there were added besides to them many like words.
Zedekiah the son of Josiah reigned as king, instead of Coniah the son of Jehoiakim, whom Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon made king in the land of Judah.
But neither he, nor his servants, nor the people of the land, hearkened to the words of Jehovah, which he spoke by the prophet Jeremiah.
Zedekiah the king sent Jehucal the son of Shelemiah,  Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah, the priest, to the prophet Jeremiah, saying, Pray now to Jehovah our God for us.
Now Jeremiah came in and went out among the people, for they had not put him into prison.
Pharaoh's army came forth out of Egypt. And when the Chaldeans who were besieging Jerusalem heard news of them, they broke away from Jerusalem.
Then the word of Jehovah came to the prophet Jeremiah, saying,
Thus says Jehovah, the God of Israel, Thus shall ye say to the king of Judah, who sent you to me to inquire of me: Behold, Pharaoh's army, which has come forth to help you, shall return to Egypt into their own land.
the Chaldeans shall come again,  fight against this city,  they shall take it,  burn it with fire.
Thus says Jehovah: Do not deceive yourselves, saying, The Chaldeans shall surely depart from us. For they shall not depart.
For though ye had smitten the whole army of the Chaldeans who fight against you,  there remained but wounded men among them, yea they would rise up every man in his tent,  burn this city with fire.
it came to pass that, when the army of the Chaldeans was broken away from Jerusalem for fear of Pharaoh's army,
then Jeremiah went forth out of Jerusalem to go into the land of Benjamin to receive his portion there in the midst of the people.
when he was in the gate of Benjamin, a captain of the ward was there, whose name was Irijah, the son of Shelemiah, the son of Hananiah. And he laid hold on Jeremiah the prophet, saying, Thou are falling away to the Chaldeans.
Then Jeremiah said, It is false. I am not falling away to the Chaldeans. But he did not hearken to him. So Irijah laid hold on Jeremiah,  brought him to the rulers.
the rulers were angry with Jeremiah,  smote him,  put him in prison in the house of Jonathan the scribe, for they had made that the prison.
When Jeremiah came into the dungeon-house,  into the cells,  Jeremiah had remained there many days,
then Zedekiah the king sent,  fetched him. And the king asked him secretly in his house,  said, Is there any word from Jehovah? And Jeremiah said, There is. He also said, Thou shall be delivered into the hand of the king of Babylon.
Moreover Jeremiah said to king Zedekiah, How have I sinned against thee, or against thy servants, or against this people, that ye have put me in prison?
Where now are your prophets who prophesied to you, saying, The king of Babylon shall not come against you, nor against this land?
now hear, I pray thee, O my lord the king. Let my supplication, I pray thee, be presented before thee, that thou not cause me to return to the house of Jonathan the scribe, lest I die there.
Then Zedekiah the king commanded,  they committed Jeremiah into the court of the guard. And they gave him a loaf of bread daily out of the bakers' street, until all the bread in the city was spent. Thus Jeremiah remained in the court of the guard.
Shephatiah the son of Mattan,  Gedaliah the son of Pashhur,  Jucal the son of Shelemiah,  Pashhur the son of Malchijah, heard the words that Jeremiah spoke to all the people, saying,
Thus says Jehovah: He who abides in this city shall die by the sword, by the famine,  by the pestilence,  he who goes forth to the Chaldeans shall live,  his life shall be to him for a prey,  he shall live.
Thus says Jehovah: This city shall surely be given into the hand of the army of the king of Babylon,  he shall take it.
Then the rulers said to the king, Let this man, we pray thee, be put to death, inasmuch as he weakens the hands of the men of war who remain in this city,  the hands of all the people, in speaking such words to them. For this man seeks not the welfare of this people,  the hurt.
Zedekiah the king said, Behold, he is in your hand, for the king is not he who can do anything against you.
Then they took Jeremiah,  cast him into the dungeon of Malchijah the king's son, that was in the court of the guard. And they let Jeremiah down with cords. And in the dungeon there was no water,  mire,  Jeremiah sank in the mire.
Now when Ebed-melech the Ethiopian, a eunuch, who was in the king's house, heard that they had put Jeremiah in the dungeon (the king then sitting in the gate of Benjamin),
Ebed-melech went forth out of the king's house,  spoke to the king, saying,
My lord the king, these men have done evil in all that they have done to Jeremiah the prophet whom they have cast into the dungeon. And he is likely to die in the place where he is because of the famine, for there is no more bread in the city.
Then the king commanded Ebed-melech the Ethiopian, saying, Take from here thirty men with thee,  take up Jeremiah the prophet out of the dungeon before he dies.
So Ebed-melech took the men with him,  went into the house of the king under the treasury,  took from there rags and worn-out garments,  let them down by cords into the dungeon to Jeremiah.
Ebed-melech the Ethiopian said to Jeremiah, Now put these rags and worn-out garments under thine armpits under the cords. And Jeremiah did so.
So they drew up Jeremiah with the cords,  took him up out of the dungeon. And Jeremiah remained in the court of the guard.
Then Zedekiah the king sent,  took Jeremiah the prophet to him into the third entry that is in the house of Jehovah. And the king said to Jeremiah, I will ask thee a thing; hide nothing from me.
Then Jeremiah said to Zedekiah, If I declare it to thee, will thou not surely put me to death? And if I give thee counsel, thou will not hearken to me.
So Zedekiah the king swore secretly to Jeremiah, saying, As Jehovah lives, who made us this soul, I will not put thee to death, nor will I give thee into the hand of these men who seek thy life.
Then Jeremiah said to Zedekiah, Thus says Jehovah, the God of hosts, the God of Israel. If thou will go forth to the king of Babylon's rulers, then thy soul shall live,  this city shall not be burned with fire,  thou shall live,  thy house.
But if thou will not go forth to the king of Babylon's rulers, then this city shall be given into the hand of the Chaldeans,  they shall burn it with fire,  thou shall not escape out of their hand.
Zedekiah the king said to Jeremiah, I am afraid of the Jews who have fallen away to the Chaldeans, lest they deliver me into their hand,  they abuse me.
But Jeremiah said, They shall not deliver thee. Obey, I beseech thee, the voice of Jehovah, in that which I speak to thee, so it shall be well with thee,  thy soul shall live.
But if thou refuse to go forth, this is the word that Jehovah has shown me:
Behold, all the women who are left in the king of Judah's house shall be brought forth to the king of Babylon's rulers. And those women shall say, Thy familiar friends have set upon thee,  have prevailed over thee. Since thy feet are sunk in the mire, they have turned back away.
they shall bring out all thy wives and thy sons to the Chaldeans. And thou shall not escape out of their hand,  shall be taken by the hand of the king of Babylon. And thou shall cause this city to be burned with fire.
Then Zedekiah said to Jeremiah, Let no man know of these words,  thou shall not die.
But if the rulers hear that I have talked with thee,  they come to thee,  say to thee, Declare to us now what thou have said to the king, hide it not from us,  we will not put thee to death, also what the king said to thee,
then thou shall say to them, I presented my supplication before the king, that he would not cause me to return to Jonathan's house to die there.
Then all the rulers came to Jeremiah,  asked him. And he told them according to all these words that the king had commanded. So they left off speaking with him, for the matter was not perceived.
So Jeremiah abode in the court of the guard until the day that Jerusalem was taken.
it came to pass when Jerusalem was taken, in the ninth year of Zedekiah king of Judah, in the tenth month, Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon and all his army came against Jerusalem,  besieged it.
In the eleventh year of Zedekiah, in the fourth month, the ninth day of the month, a breach was made in the city.
all the princes of the king of Babylon came in,  sat in the middle gate, to wit, Nergal-sharezer, Samgar-nebo, Sarsechim, Rab-saris, Nergal-sharezer, Rab-mag, with all the rest of the princes of the king of Babylon.
it came to pass that, when Zedekiah the king of Judah and all the men of war saw them, then they fled,  went forth out of the city by night, by the way of the king's garden, through the gate between the two walls,  he went out toward the Arabah.
But the army of the Chaldeans pursued after them,  overtook Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho. And when they had taken him, they brought him up to Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon to Riblah in the land of Hamath,  he gave judgment upon him.
Then the king of Babylon killed the sons of Zedekiah in Riblah before his eyes. Also the king of Babylon killed all the nobles of Judah.
Moreover he put out Zedekiah's eyes,  bound him in fetters to carry him to Babylon.
the Chaldeans burned the king's house,  the houses of the people, with fire,  broke down the walls of Jerusalem.
Then Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard carried away captive into Babylon the residue of the people that remained in the city, the deserters also that fell away to him,  the residue of the people that remained.
But Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard left of the poor of the people, that had nothing, in the land of Judah,  gave them vineyards and fields at the same time.
Now Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon gave charge concerning Jeremiah to Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard, saying,
Take him,  look well to him,  do him no harm,  do to him even as he shall say to thee.
So Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard sent,  Nebushazban, Rab-saris,  Nergal-sharezer, Rab-mag,  all the chief officers of the king of Babylon.
they sent,  took Jeremiah out of the court of the guard,  committed him to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, that he should carry him home. So he dwelt among the people.
Now the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah while he was shut up in the court of the guard, saying,
Go,  speak to Ebed-melech the Ethiopian, saying, Thus says Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: Behold, I will bring my words upon this city for evil,  not for good,  they shall be accomplished before thee in that day.
But I will deliver thee in that day, says Jehovah,  thou shall not be given into the hand of the men of whom thou are afraid.
For I will surely save thee,  thou shall not fall by the sword,  thy life shall be for a prey to thee, because thou have put thy trust in me, says Jehovah.
The word which came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, after Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard had let him go from Ramah, when he had taken him being bound in chains among all the captives of Jerusalem and Judah who were carried away captive to Babylon.
the captain of the guard took Jeremiah,  said to him, Jehovah thy God pronounced this evil upon this place,
Jehovah has brought it,  done according as he spoke. Because ye have sinned against Jehovah,  have not obeyed his voice, therefore this thing has come upon you.
now, behold, I loose thee this day from the chains which are upon thy hand. If it seem good to thee to come with me into Babylon, come,  I will look well to thee,  if it seems ill to thee to come with me into Babylon, forbear. Behold, all the land is before thee, where it seems good and right to thee to go, there go.
Now while he was not yet gone back, he said, Go back then to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, whom the king of Babylon has made governor over the cities of Judah,  dwell with him among the people, or go wherever it seems right to thee to go. So the captain of the guard gave him food and a present,  let him go.
Then Jeremiah went to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam to Mizpah,  dwelt with him among the people who were left in the land.
Now when all the captains of the forces who were in the fields, even they and their men, heard that the king of Babylon had made Gedaliah the son of Ahikam governor in the land,  had committed to him men,  women,  sons,  of the poorest of the land, of those who were not carried away captive to Babylon,
then they came to Gedaliah to Mizpah, namely, Ishmael the son of Nethaniah,  Johanan and Jonathan the sons of Kareah,  Seraiah the son of Tanhumeth,  the sons of Ephai the Netophathite,  Jezaniah the son of the Maacathite, they and their men.
Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan swore to them and to their men, saying, Fear not to serve the Chaldeans. Dwell in the land,  serve the king of Babylon,  it shall be well with you.
As for me, behold, I will dwell at Mizpah, to stand before the Chaldeans who shall come to us. But ye, gather ye wine and summer fruits and oil,  put them in your vessels,  dwell in your cities that ye have taken.
Likewise when all the Jews that were in Moab,  among the sons of Ammon,  in Edom,  who were in all the countries, heard that the king of Babylon had left a remnant of Judah,  that he had set over them Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan,
then all the Jews returned out of all places where they were driven,  came to the land of Judah, to Gedaliah, to Mizpah,  gathered very much wine and summer fruits.
Moreover Johanan the son of Kareah,  all the captains of the forces who were in the fields, came to Gedaliah to Mizpah,
said to him, Do thou know that Baalis the king of the sons of Ammon has sent Ishmael the son of Nethaniah to take thy life? But Gedaliah the son of Ahikam did not believe them.
Then Johanan the son of Kareah spoke to Gedaliah in Mizpah secretly, saying, Let me go, I pray thee,  I will kill Ishmael the son of Nethaniah,  no man shall know it. Why should he take thy life, that all the Jews who are gathered to thee should be scattered,  the remnant of Judah perish?
But Gedaliah the son of Ahikam said to Johanan the son of Kareah, Thou shall not do this thing, for thou speak falsely of Ishmael.
Now it came to pass in the seventh month, that Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, the son of Elishama, of the seed royal and one of the chief officers of the king,  ten men with him, came to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam to Mizpah,  there they ate bread together in Mizpah.
Then Ishmael the son of Nethaniah,  the ten men who were with him, arose and smote Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan with the sword,  killed him, whom the king of Babylon had made governor over the land.
Ishmael also killed all the Jews who were with him, namely, with Gedaliah, at Mizpah,  the Chaldeans who were found there, the men of war.
it came to pass the second day after he had slain Gedaliah,  no man knew it,
that men came from Shechem, from Shiloh,  from Samaria, even eighty men, having their beards shaven and their clothes torn,  having cut themselves, with meal offerings and frankincense in their hand, to bring them to the house of Jehovah.
Ishmael the son of Nethaniah went forth from Mizpah to meet them, weeping all along as he went. And it came to pass, as he met them, he said to them, Come to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam.
it was so, when they came into the midst of the city, that Ishmael the son of Nethaniah killed them,  cast them into the midst of the pit, he,  the men who were with him.
But ten men were found among those who said to Ishmael, Kill us not, for we have stores hidden in the field, of wheat,  of barley,  of oil,  of honey. So he held back,  did not kill them among their brothers.
Now the pit in which Ishmael cast all the dead bodies of the men whom he had slain by the side of Gedaliah (the same was that which Asa the king had made for fear of Baasha king of Israel), Ishmael the son of Nethaniah filled it with those who were slain.
Then Ishmael carried away captive all the residue of the people who were in Mizpah, even the king's daughters,  all the people who remained in Mizpah, whom Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard had committed to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam. Ishmael the son of Nethaniah carried them away captive,  departed to go over to the sons of Ammon.
But when Johanan the son of Kareah,  all the captains of the forces who were with him, heard of all the evil that Ishmael the son of Nethaniah had done,
then they took all the men,  went to fight with Ishmael the son of Nethaniah,  found him by the great waters that are in Gibeon.
Now it came to pass that, when all the people who were with Ishmael saw Johanan the son of Kareah,  all the captains of the forces who were with him, then they were glad.
So all the people that Ishmael had carried away captive from Mizpah turned about and came back,  went to Johanan the son of Kareah.
But Ishmael the son of Nethaniah escaped from Johanan with eight men,  went to the sons of Ammon.
Then Johanan the son of Kareah,  all the captains of the forces who were with him, took all the remnant of the people whom he had recovered from Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, from Mizpah, after he had slain Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, namely, the men of war,  the women,  the sons,  the eunuchs, whom he had brought back from Gibeon.
they departed,  dwelt in Geruth Chimham, which is by Bethlehem, to go to enter into Egypt
because of the Chaldeans, for they were afraid of them because Ishmael the son of Nethaniah had slain Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, whom the king of Babylon made governor over the land.
Then all the captains of the forces,  Johanan the son of Kareah,  Jezaniah the son of Hoshaiah,  all the people from the least even to the greatest, came near,
said to Jeremiah the prophet, Let, we pray thee, our supplication be presented before thee,  pray for us to Jehovah thy God, even for all this remnant, for we are left but a few of many, as thine eyes do behold us,
that Jehovah thy God may show us the way in which we should walk,  the thing that we should do.
Then Jeremiah the prophet said to them, I have heard you. Behold, I will pray to Jehovah your God according to your words,  it shall come to pass that whatever thing Jehovah shall answer you, I will declare it to you. I will keep nothing back from you.
Then they said to Jeremiah, Jehovah be a true and faithful witness amongst us, if we do not according to all the word with which Jehovah thy God shall send thee to us.
Whether it be good, or whether it be evil, we will obey the voice of Jehovah our God, to whom we send thee, that it may be well with us when we obey the voice of Jehovah our God.
it came to pass after ten days, that the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah.
Then he called Johanan the son of Kareah,  all the captains of the forces who were with him,  all the people from the least even to the greatest,
said to them, Thus says Jehovah, the God of Israel, to whom ye sent me to present your supplication before him:
If ye will still abide in this land, then I will build you,  not pull you down,  I will plant you,  not pluck you up, for I relent of the evil that I have done to you.
Be not afraid of the king of Babylon, of whom ye are afraid. Be not afraid of him, says Jehovah, for I am with you to save you,  to deliver you from his hand.
I will grant you mercy, that he may have mercy upon you,  cause you to return to your own land.
But if ye say, We will not dwell in this land, so that ye do not obey the voice of Jehovah your God,
saying, No,  we will go into the land of Egypt, where we shall see no war, nor hear the sound of the trumpet, nor have hunger of bread,  we will dwell there-
Now therefore hear ye the word of Jehovah, O remnant of Judah. Thus says Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: If ye indeed set your faces to enter into Egypt,  go to sojourn there,
then it shall come to pass, that the sword, which ye fear, shall overtake you there in the land of Egypt,  the famine, of which ye are afraid, shall follow hard after you there in Egypt,  there ye shall die.
So shall it be with all the men who set their faces to go into Egypt to sojourn there. They shall die by the sword, by the famine,  by the pestilence,  none of them shall remain or escape from the evil that I will bring upon them.
For thus says Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: As my anger and my wrath has been poured forth upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so shall my wrath be poured forth upon you when ye shall enter into Egypt. And ye shall be an execration,  an astonishment,  a curse,  a reproach. And ye shall see this place no more.
Jehovah has spoken concerning you, O remnant of Judah, Go ye not into Egypt. Know certainly that I have testified to you this day.
For ye have dealt deceitfully against your own souls. For ye sent me to Jehovah your God, saying, Pray for us to Jehovah our God,  according to all that Jehovah our God shall say, so declare to us,  we will do it.
I have this day declared it to you. But ye have not obeyed the voice of Jehovah your God in anything for which he has sent me to you.
Now therefore know certainly that ye shall die by the sword, by the famine,  by the pestilence, in the place where ye desire to go to sojourn there.
it came to pass that, when Jeremiah had made an end of speaking to all the people all the words of Jehovah their God, with which Jehovah their God had sent him to them, even all these words,
then Azariah the son of Hoshaiah,  Johanan the son of Kareah,  all the proud men, spoke, saying to Jeremiah, Thou speak falsely. Jehovah our God has not sent thee to say, Ye shall not go into Egypt to sojourn there.
But Baruch the son of Neriah set upon thee against us, to deliver us into the hand of the Chaldeans, that they may put us to death,  carry us away captive to Babylon.
So Johanan the son of Kareah,  all the captains of the forces,  all the people, did not obey the voice of Jehovah, to dwell in the land of Judah.
But Johanan the son of Kareah,  all the captains of the forces, took all the remnant of Judah, who were returned from all the nations where they had been driven to sojourn in the land of Judah,
the men,  the women,  the sons,  the king's daughters,  every person that Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard had left with Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan,  Jeremiah the prophet,  Baruch the son of Neriah,
they came into the land of Egypt, for they did not obey the voice of Jehovah. And they came to Tahpanhes.
Then the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah in Tahpanhes, saying,
Take great stones in thy hand,  hide them in mortar in the brickwork, which is at the entry of Pharaoh's house in Tahpanhes, in the sight of the men of Judah,
say to them, Thus says Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: Behold, I will send and take Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon, my servant,  will set his throne upon these stones that I have hid,  he shall spread his royal pavilion over them.
he shall come,  shall smite the land of Egypt, such as are for death, to death,  such as are for captivity, to captivity,  such as are for the sword, to the sword.
I will kindle a fire in the houses of the gods of Egypt,  he shall burn them,  carry them away captive. And he shall array himself with the land of Egypt as a shepherd puts on his garment,  he shall go forth from there in peace.
He shall also break the pillars of Beth-shemesh that is in the land of Egypt. And the houses of the gods of Egypt he shall burn with fire.
The word that came to Jeremiah concerning all the Jews who dwelt in the land of Egypt, who dwelt at Migdol,  at Tahpanhes,  at Memphis,  in the country of Pathros, saying,
Thus says Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: Ye have seen all the evil that I have brought upon Jerusalem,  upon all the cities of Judah. And, behold, this day they are a desolation. And no man dwells therein
because of their wickedness which they have committed to provoke me to anger, in that they went to burn incense,  to serve other gods, that they knew not, neither they, nor ye, nor your fathers.
However I sent all my servants the prophets to you, rising up early and sending them, saying, Oh, do not do this abominable thing that I hate.
But they hearkened not, nor inclined their ear to turn from their wickedness, to burn no incense to other gods.
Therefore my wrath and my anger was poured forth,  was kindled in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem,  they are wasted and desolate, as it is this day.
Therefore now thus says Jehovah, the God of hosts, the God of Israel: Why do ye commit this great evil against your own souls, to cut off from you man and woman, infant and suckling, out of the midst of Judah, to leave you none remaining,
in that ye provoke me to anger with the works of your hands, burning incense to other gods in the land of Egypt, where ye have gone to sojourn, that ye may be cut off,  that ye may be a curse and a reproach among all the nations of the earth?
Have ye forgotten the wickedness of your fathers,  the wickedness of the kings of Judah,  the wickedness of their wives,  your own wickedness,  the wickedness of your wives which they committed in the land of Judah,  in the streets of Jerusalem?
They are not humbled even to this day. Neither have they feared, nor walked in my law, nor in my statutes, that I set before you and before your fathers.
Therefore thus says Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: Behold, I will set my face against you for evil, even to cut off all Judah.
I will take the remnant of Judah, who have set their faces to go into the land of Egypt to sojourn there,  they shall all be consumed. In the land of Egypt they shall fall. They shall be consumed by the sword and by the famine. They shall die, from the least even to the greatest, by the sword and by the famine,  they shall be an execration,  an astonishment,  a curse,  a reproach.
For I will punish those who dwell in the land of Egypt, as I have punished Jerusalem, by the sword, by the famine,  by the pestilence,
so that none of the remnant of Judah who have gone into the land of Egypt to sojourn there, shall escape or be left to return into the land of Judah, to which they have a desire to return to dwell there. For none shall return except such as shall escape.
Then all the men who knew that their wives burned incense to other gods,  all the women who stood by, a great assembly, even all the people who dwelt in the land of Egypt, in Pathros, answered Jeremiah, saying,
As for the word that thou have spoken to us in the name of Jehovah, we will not hearken to thee.
But we will certainly perform every word that has gone forth out of our mouth, to burn incense to the queen of heaven,  to pour out drink offerings to her, as we have done, we and our fathers, our kings and our rulers, in the cities of Judah,  in the streets of Jerusalem. For then we had plenty of food,  were well,  saw no evil.
But since we left off burning incense to the queen of heaven,  pouring out drink offerings to her, we have lacked all things,  have been consumed by the sword and by the famine.
when we burned incense to the queen of heaven,  poured out drink offerings to her, did we make her cakes to worship her,  pour out drink offerings to her, without our husbands?
Then Jeremiah said to all the people, to the men,  to the women, even to all the people who had given him that answer, saying,
The incense that ye burned in the cities of Judah,  in the streets of Jerusalem, ye and your fathers, your kings and your rulers,  the people of the land, did Jehovah not remember them,  did it not come into his mind?
So that Jehovah could no longer bear, because of the evil of your doings,  because of the abominations which ye have committed. Therefore your land has become a desolation,  an astonishment,  a curse, without inhabitant, as it is this day.
Because ye have burned incense,  because ye have sinned against Jehovah,  have not obeyed the voice of Jehovah, nor walked in his law, nor in his statutes, nor in his testimonies, therefore this evil has happened to you, as it is this day.
Moreover Jeremiah said to all the people,  to all the women, Hear the word of Jehovah, all Judah who are in the land of Egypt:
Thus says Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel, saying, Ye and your wives have both spoken with your mouths,  with your hands have fulfilled it, saying, We will surely perform our vows that we have vowed, to burn incense to the queen of heaven,  to pour out drink offerings to her. Establish then your vows,  perform your vows.
Therefore hear ye the word of Jehovah, all Judah who dwell in the land of Egypt: Behold, I have sworn by my great name, says Jehovah, that my name shall no more be named in the mouth of any man of Judah in all the land of Egypt, saying, As the lord Jehovah lives.
Behold, I watch over them for evil,  not for good. And all the men of Judah who are in the land of Egypt shall be consumed by the sword and by the famine, until there is an end of them.
those who escape the sword shall return out of the land of Egypt into the land of Judah, few in number. And all the remnant of Judah, who have gone into the land of Egypt to sojourn there, shall know whose word shall stand, mine, or theirs.
this shall be the sign to you, says Jehovah, that I will punish you in this place, that ye may know that my words shall surely stand against you for evil:
Thus says Jehovah: Behold, I will give Pharaoh Hophra king of Egypt into the hand of his enemies,  into the hand of those who seek his life, as I gave Zedekiah king of Judah into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, who was his enemy,  sought his life.
The word that Jeremiah the prophet spoke to Baruch the son of Neriah, when he wrote these word in a book at the mouth of Jeremiah, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah, saying,
Thus says Jehovah, the God of Israel, to thee, O Baruch:
Thou said, Woe is me now! For Jehovah has added sorrow to my pain. I am weary with my groaning,  I find no rest.
Thus thou shall say to him, Thus says Jehovah: Behold, that which I have built I will break down,  that which I have planted I will pluck up,  this in the whole land.
do thou seek great things for thyself? Seek them not, for, behold, I will bring evil upon all flesh, says Jehovah,  thy life I will give to thee for a prey in all places where thou go.
The word of Jehovah which came to Jeremiah the prophet concerning the nations.
Of Egypt, concerning the army of Pharaoh-neco king of Egypt, which was by the river Euphrates in Carchemish, which Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon smote in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah:
Prepare ye the buckler and shield,  draw near to battle.
Harness the horses,  get up, ye horsemen,  stand forth with your helmets. Furbish the spears. Put on the coats of mail.
Why have I seen it? They are dismayed and have turned backward. And their mighty ones are beaten down,  have fled apace,  do not look back. Terror is on every side, says Jehovah.
Let not the swift flee away, nor the mighty man escape. In the north by the river Euphrates they have stumbled and fallen.
Who is this that rises up like the Nile, whose waters toss themselves like the rivers?
Egypt rises up like the Nile,  his waters toss themselves like the rivers. And he says, I will rise up. I will cover the earth. I will destroy cities and the inhabitants thereof.
Go up, ye horses,  rage, ye chariots. And let the mighty men go forth: Cush and Put, who handle the shield,  the Ludim, who handle and bend the bow.
For that day is a day of the Lord, Jehovah of hosts, a day of vengeance, that he may avenge him of his adversaries. And the sword shall devour and be satiate,  shall drink its fill of their blood, for the Lord, Jehovah of hosts, has a sacrifice in the north country by the river Euphrates.
Go up into Gilead,  take balm, O virgin daughter of Egypt. In vain do thou use many medicines; there is no healing for thee.
The nations have heard of thy shame,  the earth is full of thy cry. For the mighty man has stumbled against the mighty; they are fallen, both of them together.
The word that Jehovah spoke to Jeremiah the prophet, how that Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon should come and smite the land of Egypt.
Declare ye in Egypt,  publish in Migdol,  publish in Memphis and in Tahpanhes. Say ye, Stand forth,  prepare thee, for the sword has devoured round about thee.
Why are thy strong ones swept away? They stood not, because Jehovah drove them.
He made many to stumble, yea, they fell one upon another. And they said, Arise,  let us go again to our own people,  to the land of our nativity, from the oppressing sword.
They cried there, Pharaoh king of Egypt is but a noise. He has let the appointed time pass by.
As I live, says the King, whose name is Jehovah of hosts, surely like Tabor among the mountains,  like Carmel by the sea, so shall he come.
O thou daughter who dwells in Egypt, prepare thyself to go into captivity. For Memphis shall become a desolation,  shall be burnt up, without inhabitant.
Egypt is a very fair heifer,  destruction out of the north has come, it has come.
Also her hired men in the midst of her are like calves of the stall, for they also are turned back. They have fled away together. They did not stand, for the day of their calamity has come upon them, the time of their visitation.
The sound thereof shall go like the serpent, for they shall march with an army,  come against her with axes, as hewers of wood.
They shall cut down her forest, says Jehovah, though it cannot be searched because they are more than the locusts,  are innumerable.
The daughter of Egypt shall be put to shame. She shall be delivered into the hand of the people of the north.
Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel, says, Behold, I will punish Amon of No,  Pharaoh,  Egypt, with their gods,  their kings, even Pharaoh,  those who trust in him.
I will deliver them into the hand of those who seek their lives,  into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon,  into the hand of his servants. And afterwards it shall be inhabited, as in the days of old, says Jehovah.
But fear thou not, O Jacob my servant, nor be dismayed, O Israel. For, lo, I will save thee from afar,  thy seed from the land of their captivity. And Jacob shall return,  shall be quiet and at ease,  none shall make him afraid.
Fear thou not, O Jacob my servant, says Jehovah, for I am with thee. For I will make a full end of all the nations where I have driven thee,  I will not make a full end of thee. But I will correct thee in measure,  will in no way leave thee unpunished.
The word of Jehovah that came to Jeremiah the prophet concerning the Philistines, before Pharaoh smote Gaza.
Thus says Jehovah: Behold, waters rise up out of the north,  shall become an overflowing stream,  shall overflow the land and all that is therein, the city and those who dwell therein. And the men shall cry,  all the inhabitants of the land shall wail
at the noise of the stamping of the hoofs of his strong ones, at the rushing of his chariots, at the rumbling of his wheels. The fathers do not look back to their sons for feebleness of hands,
because of the day that comes to destroy all the Philistines, to cut off from Tyre and Sidon every helper who remains. For Jehovah will destroy the Philistines, the remnant of the isle of Caphtor.
Baldness has come upon Gaza. Ashkelon is brought to naught, the remnant of their valley. How long will thou cut thyself?
O thou sword of Jehovah, how long will it be ere thou be quiet? Put up thyself into thy scabbard. Rest,  be still.
How can thou be quiet, since Jehovah has given thee a charge against Ashkelon,  against the sea-shore. He has appointed it there.
Of Moab. Thus says Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: Woe to Nebo! For it is laid waste. Kiriathaim is put to shame; it is taken. Misgab is put to shame and broken down.
The praise of Moab is no more. In Heshbon they have devised evil against her: Come,  let us cut her off from being a nation. Thou also, O madmen, shall be brought to silence. The sword shall pursue thee.
The sound of a cry from Horonaim: Desolation and great destruction!
Moab is destroyed. Her little ones have caused a cry to be heard.
For they shall go up by the ascent of Luhith with continual weeping, for at the descent of Horonaim they have heard the distress of the cry of destruction.
Flee, save your lives,  be like the heath in the wilderness.
For, because thou have trusted in thy works and in thy treasures, thou also shall be taken. And Chemosh shall go forth into captivity, his priests and his rulers together.
the destroyer shall come upon every city,  no city shall escape. The valley also shall perish,  the plain shall be destroyed, as Jehovah has spoken.
Give wings to Moab, that she may fly and get her away. And her cities shall become a desolation, without any to dwell therein.
Cursed be he who does the work of Jehovah negligently,  cursed be he who keeps back his sword from blood.
Moab has been at ease from his youth,  he has settled on his lees,  has not been emptied from vessel to vessel, nor has he gone into captivity. Therefore his taste remains in him,  his scent is not changed.
Therefore, behold, the days come, says Jehovah, that I will send to him those who pour off,  they shall pour him off. And they shall empty his vessels,  break their bottles in pieces.
Moab shall be ashamed of Chemosh, as the house of Israel was ashamed of Bethel their confidence.
How can ye say, We are mighty men,  valiant men for the war?
Moab is laid waste,  they have gone up into his cities. And his chosen young men have gone down to the slaughter, says the King, whose name is Jehovah of hosts.
The calamity of Moab is near to come,  his affliction hastens fast.
All ye who are round about him, bemoan him,  all ye who know his name, say, How the strong staff has broken, the beautiful rod!
O thou daughter who dwells in Dibon, come down from thy glory,  sit in thirst, for the destroyer of Moab has come up against thee. He has destroyed thy strongholds.
O inhabitant of Aroer, stand by the way,  watch. Ask him who flees,  her who escapes. Say, What has been done?
Moab is put to shame, for it is broken down. Wail and cry, tell ye it by the Arnon, that Moab is laid waste.
judgment has come upon the plain country: upon Holon,  upon Jahzah,  upon Mephaath,
upon Dibon,  upon Nebo,  upon Beth-diblathaim,
upon Kiriathaim,  upon Beth-gamul,  upon Beth-meon,
upon Kerioth,  upon Bozrah,  upon all the cities of the land of Moab, far or near.
The horn of Moab is cut off,  his arm is broken, says Jehovah.
Make ye him drunken, for he magnified himself against Jehovah. And Moab shall wallow in his vomit,  he also shall be in derision.
For was not Israel a derision to thee? Was he found among thieves? For as often as thou speak of him, thou wag the head.
O ye inhabitants of Moab, leave the cities,  dwell in the rock,  be like the dove that makes her nest over the mouth of an abyss.
We have heard of the pride of Moab, that he is very proud, his loftiness,  his pride,  his arrogance,  the haughtiness of his heart.
I know his wrath, says Jehovah, that it is nothing. His boastings have wrought nothing.
Therefore I will wail for Moab, yea, I will cry out for all Moab. For they shall mourn the men of Kir-heres.
With more than the weeping of Jazer I will weep for thee, O vine of Sibmah. Thy branches passed over the sea. They reached even to the sea of Jazer. The destroyer has fallen upon thy summer fruits and upon thy vintage.
gladness and joy is taken away from the fruitful field and from the land of Moab. And I have caused wine to cease from the winepresses. None shall tread with shouting. The shouting shall be no shouting.
From the cry of Heshbon even to Elealeh, even to Jahaz they have uttered their voice, from Zoar even to Horonaim, to Eglath-shelishiyah. For the waters of Nimrim also shall become desolate.
Moreover I will cause to cease in Moab, says Jehovah, him who offers in the high place,  him who burns incense to his gods.
Therefore my heart sounds for Moab like pipes,  my heart sounds like pipes for the men of Kir-heres. Therefore the abundance that he has gotten is perished.
For every head is bald,  every beard clipped. Upon all the hands are cuttings,  upon the loins sackcloth.
On all the housetops of Moab and in the streets thereof there is lamentation everywhere. For I have broken Moab like a vessel of which none delights, says Jehovah.
How it is broken down! How they do wail! How Moab has turned the back with shame! So Moab shall become a derision and a horror to all who are round about him.
For thus says Jehovah: Behold, he shall fly as an eagle,  shall spread out his wings against Moab.
Kerioth is taken,  the strongholds are seized,  the heart of the mighty men of Moab at that day shall be as the heart of a woman in her pangs.
Moab shall be destroyed from being a people, because he has magnified himself against Jehovah.
Fear and the pit and the snare are upon thee, O inhabitant of Moab, says Jehovah.
He who flees from the fear shall fall into the pit,  he who gets up out of the pit shall be taken in the snare. For I will bring upon him, even upon Moab, the year of their visitation, says Jehovah.
Those who fled stand without strength under the shadow of Heshbon. For a fire has gone forth out of Heshbon,  a flame from the midst of Sihon,  has devoured the corner of Moab,  the crown of the head of the tumultuous ones.
Woe to thee, O Moab! The people of Chemosh is undone, for thy sons are taken away captive,  thy daughters into captivity.
Yet I will bring back the captivity of Moab in the latter days, says Jehovah. Thus far is the judgment of Moab.
Concerning the sons of Ammon. Thus says Jehovah: Has Israel no sons? Has he no heir? Why then does Malcam possess Gad,  his people dwell in the cities thereof?
Therefore, behold, the days come, says Jehovah, that I will cause an alarm of war to be heard against Rabbah of the sons of Ammon,  it shall become a desolate heap,  her daughters shall be burned with fire. Then Israel shall possess those who possessed him, says Jehovah.
Wail, O Heshbon, for Ai is laid waste. Cry, ye daughters of Rabbah. Gird you with sackcloth. Lament,  run to and fro among the fences. For Malcam shall go into captivity, his priests and his rulers together.
Why do thou glory in the valleys, thy flowing valley? O backsliding daughter, who trusted in her treasures, saying, Who shall come to me?
Behold, I will bring a fear upon thee, says the Lord, Jehovah of hosts, from all who are round about thee. And ye shall be driven out every man straight forth,  there shall be none to gather together the fugitives.
But afterward I will bring back the captivity of the sons of Ammon, says Jehovah.
Of Edom. Thus says Jehovah of hosts: Is wisdom no more in Teman? Has counsel perished from the prudent? Has their wisdom vanished?
Flee ye, turn back, dwell in the depths, O inhabitants of Dedan. For I will bring the calamity of Esau upon him, the time that I shall visit him.
If grape-gatherers came to thee, would they not leave some gleaning grapes? If thieves by night, would they not destroy till they had enough?
But I have made Esau bare. I have uncovered his secret places,  he shall not be able to hide himself. His seed is destroyed,  his brothers,  his neighbors,  he is not.
Leave thy fatherless sons; I will preserve them alive. And let thy widows trust in me.
For thus says Jehovah: Behold, those to whom it did not pertain to drink of the cup shall assuredly drink. And are thou he who shall go altogether unpunished? Thou shall not go unpunished,  thou shall surely drink.
For I have sworn by myself, says Jehovah, that Bozrah shall become an astonishment, a reproach, a waste,  a curse,  all the cities thereof shall be perpetual wastes.
I have heard news from Jehovah. And an ambassador is sent among the nations, saying, Gather yourselves together,  come against her,  rise up to the battle.
For, behold, I have made thee small among the nations,  despised among men.
As for thy formidableness, the pride of thy heart has deceived thee, O thou who dwells in the clefts of the rock, who holds the height of the hill. Though thou should make thy nest as high as the eagle, I will bring thee down from there, says Jehovah.
Edom shall become an astonishment. Everyone who passes by it shall be astonished,  shall hiss at all the plagues of it.
As in the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah and the neighbor cities thereof, says Jehovah, no man shall dwell there, nor shall any son of man sojourn in it.
Behold, he shall come up like a lion from the pride of the Jordan against the strong habitation. For I will suddenly make them run away from it. And he who is chosen, him I will appoint over it. For who is like me,  who will appoint a time for me,  who is the shepherd who will stand before me?
Therefore hear ye the counsel of Jehovah that he has taken against Edom,  his purposes, that he has purposed against the inhabitants of Teman: Surely they shall drag them away, even the little ones of the flock. Surely he shall make their habitation desolate over them.
The earth trembles at the noise of their fall. There is a cry; the noise of it is heard in the Red Sea.
Behold, he shall come up and fly as the eagle,  spread out his wings against Bozrah. And the heart of the mighty men of Edom at that day shall be as the heart of a woman in her pangs.
Of Damascus. Hamath is confounded,  Arpad, for they have heard evil news. They are melted away. There is sorrow on the sea; it cannot be quiet.
Damascus has grown feeble. She turns herself to flee,  trembling has seized on her. Anguish and sorrows have taken hold of her, as of a woman in travail.
How is the city of praise not forsaken, the city of my joy?
Therefore her young men shall fall in her streets,  all the men of war shall be brought to silence in that day, says Jehovah of hosts.
I will kindle a fire in the wall of Damascus,  it shall devour the palaces of Ben-hadad.
Of Kedar,  of the kingdoms of Hazor, which Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon smote. Thus says Jehovah: Arise ye. Go up to Kedar,  destroy the sons of the east.
They shall take their tents and their flocks. They shall carry away for themselves their curtains,  all their vessels,  their camels. And they shall cry to them, Terror on every side!
Flee ye. Wander far off. Dwell in the depths, O ye inhabitants of Hazor, says Jehovah. For Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon has taken counsel against you,  has conceived a purpose against you.
Arise, get you up to a nation that is at ease, that dwells without worry, says Jehovah, that has neither gates nor bars, that dwells alone.
their camels shall be a booty,  the multitude of their cattle a spoil. And I will scatter to all winds those who have the corners of their hair cut off. And I will bring their calamity from every side of them, says Jehovah.
Hazor shall be a dwelling-place of jackals, a desolation forever. No man shall dwell there, nor shall any son of man sojourn therein.
The word of Jehovah that came to Jeremiah the prophet concerning Elam, in the beginning of the reign of Zedekiah king of Judah, saying,
Thus says Jehovah of hosts: Behold, I will break the bow of Elam, the chief of their might.
upon Elam I will bring the four winds from the four quarters of heaven,  will scatter them toward all those winds. And there shall be no nation where the outcasts of Elam shall not come.
I will cause Elam to be dismayed before their enemies,  before those who seek their life. And I will bring evil upon them, even my fierce anger, says Jehovah. And I will send the sword after them, till I have consumed them.
I will set my throne in Elam,  will destroy from there king and rulers, says Jehovah.
But it shall come to pass in the latter days, that I will bring back the captivity of Elam, says Jehovah.
The word that Jehovah spoke concerning Babylon, concerning the land of the Chaldeans, by Jeremiah the prophet.
Declare ye among the nations and publish,  set up a standard, publish,  conceal not. Say, Babylon is taken. Bel is put to shame. Merodach is dismayed. Her images are put to shame; her idols are dismayed.
For out of the north there comes up a nation against her, which shall make her land desolate,  none shall dwell therein. They are fled. They are gone, both man and beast.
In those days,  in that time, says Jehovah, the sons of Israel shall come, they and the sons of Judah together. They shall go on their way weeping,  shall seek Jehovah their God.
They shall inquire concerning Zion with their faces toward it, saying, Come ye,  join yourselves to Jehovah in an everlasting covenant that shall not be forgotten.
My people have been lost sheep. Their shepherds have caused them to go astray. They have turned them away on the mountains. They have gone from mountain to hill. They have forgotten their resting-place.
All who found them have devoured them,  their adversaries said, We are not guilty, because they have sinned against Jehovah, the habitation of righteousness, even Jehovah, the hope of their fathers.
Flee out of the midst of Babylon,  go forth out of the land of the Chaldeans,  be as the he-goats before the flocks.
For, lo, I will stir up and cause to come up against Babylon a company of great nations from the north country,  they shall set themselves in array against her. From there she shall be taken. Their arrows shall be as of an expert mighty man; none shall return in vain.
Chaldea shall be a prey. All who prey upon her shall be satisfied, says Jehovah.
Because ye are glad, because ye rejoice, O ye who plunder my heritage, because ye are wanton as a heifer that treads out the grain,  neigh as strong horses,
your mother shall be utterly put to shame. She who bore you shall be confounded. Behold, she shall be the hindermost of the nations, a wilderness, a dry land,  a desert.
Because of the wrath of Jehovah she shall not be inhabited,  she shall be wholly desolate. Everyone who goes by Babylon shall be astonished,  hiss at all her plagues.
Set yourselves in array against Babylon round about, all ye who bend the bow. Shoot at her; spare no arrows. For she has sinned against Jehovah.
Shout against her round about. She has submitted herself. Her bulwarks are fallen. Her walls are thrown down. For it is the vengeance of Jehovah. Take vengeance upon her. As she has done, do to her.
Cut off the sower from Babylon,  him who handles the sickle in the time of harvest. For fear of the oppressing sword they shall turn each one to his people,  they shall flee each one to his own land.
Israel is a hunted sheep, the lions have driven him away. First, the king of Assyria devoured him,  now at last Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon has broken his bones.
Therefore thus says Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: Behold, I will punish the king of Babylon and his land, as I have punished the king of Assyria.
I will bring Israel again to his pasture,  he shall feed on Carmel and Bashan,  his soul shall be satisfied upon the hills of Ephraim and in Gilead.
In those days,  in that time, says Jehovah, the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for,  there shall be none,  the sins of Judah,  they shall not be found. For I will pardon those whom I leave as a remnant.
Go up against the land of Merathaim, even against it,  against the inhabitants of Pekod. Kill and utterly destroy after them, says Jehovah,  do according to all that I have commanded thee.
A sound of battle is in the land,  of great destruction.
How the hammer of the whole earth is cut apart and broken! How Babylon has become a desolation among the nations!
I have laid a snare for thee,  thou are also taken, O Babylon,  thou were not aware. Thou are found,  also caught, because thou have striven against Jehovah.
Jehovah has opened his armory,  has brought forth the weapons of his indignation, for the Lord, Jehovah of hosts, has a work in the land of the Chaldeans.
Come against her from the utmost border. Open her store-houses. Cast her up as heaps,  destroy her utterly; let nothing of her be left.
Kill all her bullocks. Let them go down to the slaughter. Woe to them! For their day has come, the time of their visitation.
The voice of those who flee and escape out of the land of Babylon, to declare in Zion the vengeance of Jehovah our God, the vengeance of his temple.
Call together the archers against Babylon, all those who bend the bow. Encamp against her round about; let none thereof escape. Recompense her according to her work. According to all that she has done, do to her. For she has been proud against Jehovah, against the Holy One of Israel.
Therefore her young men shall fall in her streets,  all her men of war shall be brought to silence in that day, says Jehovah.
Behold, I am against thee, O thou proud one, says the Lord, Jehovah of hosts, for thy day has come, the time that I will visit thee.
the proud one shall stumble and fall,  none shall raise him up. And I will kindle a fire in his cities,  it shall devour all who are round about him.
Thus says Jehovah of hosts: The sons of Israel and the sons of Judah are oppressed together,  all who took them captive hold them firm; they refuse to let them go.
Their Redeemer is strong. Jehovah of hosts is his name. He will thoroughly plead their cause, that he may give rest to the earth,  disquiet the inhabitants of Babylon.
A sword is upon the Chaldeans, says Jehovah,  upon the inhabitants of Babylon,  upon her rulers,  upon her wise men.
A sword is upon the boasters,  they shall become fools. A sword is upon her mighty men,  they shall be dismayed.
A sword is upon their horses,  upon their chariots,  upon all the mixed people who are in the midst of her,  they shall become as women. A sword is upon her treasures,  they shall be robbed.
A drought is upon her waters,  they shall be dried up. For it is a land of graven images,  they are mad over idols.
Therefore the wild beasts of the desert with the wolves shall dwell there,  the ostriches shall dwell therein. And it shall no more be inhabited forever, nor shall it be dwelt in from generation to generation.
As when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah and the neighbor cities thereof, says Jehovah, so shall no man dwell there, nor shall any son of man sojourn in it.
Behold, a people comes from the north,  a great nation and many kings shall be stirred up from the outermost parts of the earth.
They lay hold on bow and spear. They are cruel,  have no mercy. Their voice roars like the sea,  they ride upon horses, each one set in array, as a man to the battle, against thee, O daughter of Babylon.
The king of Babylon has heard the news of them,  his hands grow feeble. Anguish has taken hold of him,  pangs as of a woman in travail.
Behold, the enemy shall come up like a lion from the pride of the Jordan against the strong habitation. For I will suddenly make them run away from it,  he who is chosen, him I will appoint over it. For who is like me,  who will appoint a time for me,  who is the shepherd who can stand before me?
Therefore hear ye the counsel of Jehovah, that he has taken against Babylon,  his purposes, that he has purposed against the land of the Chaldeans: Surely they shall drag them away, even the little ones of the flock. Surely he shall make their habitation desolate over them.
At the noise of the taking of Babylon the earth trembles,  the cry is heard among the nations.
Thus says Jehovah: Behold, I will raise up against Babylon,  against those who dwell in Leb-kamai, a destroying wind.
I will send strangers to Babylon, who shall winnow her,  they shall empty her land. For in the day of trouble they shall be against her round about.
Against him who bends let the archer bend his bow,  against him who lifts himself up in his coat of mail. And spare ye not her young men. Destroy ye utterly all her host.
they shall fall down slain in the land of the Chaldeans,  thrust through in her streets.
For Israel is not forsaken, nor Judah, of his God, of Jehovah of hosts, though their land is full of guilt against the Holy One of Israel.
Flee out of the midst of Babylon,  save every man his life. Be not cut off in her iniquity, for it is the time of Jehovah's vengeance; he will render to her a recompense.
Babylon has been a golden cup in Jehovah's hand, that made all the earth drunken. The nations have drunk of her wine, therefore the nations are mad.
Babylon is suddenly fallen and destroyed. Wail for her. Take balm for her pain, if so be she may be healed.
We would have healed Babylon,  she is not healed. Forsake her,  let us go each one into his own country. For her judgment reaches to heaven,  is lifted up even to the skies.
Jehovah has brought forth our righteousness. Come,  let us declare in Zion the work of Jehovah our God.
Make sharp the arrows. Hold firm the shields. Jehovah has stirred up the spirit of the kings of the Medes, because his purpose is against Babylon, to destroy it. For it is the vengeance of Jehovah, the vengeance of his temple.
Set up a standard against the walls of Babylon. Make the watch strong. Set the watchmen. Prepare the ambushes. For Jehovah has both purposed and done that which he spoke concerning the inhabitants of Babylon.
O thou who dwell upon many waters, abundant in treasures, thine end has come, the measure of thy covetousness.
Jehovah of hosts has sworn by himself, saying, Surely I will fill thee with men as with the canker-worm,  they shall lift up a shout against thee.
He has made the earth by his power. He has established the world by his wisdom,  by his understanding he has stretched out the heavens.
When he utters his voice, there is a tumult of waters in the heavens,  he causes the vapors to ascend from the ends of the earth. He makes lightnings for the rain,  brings forth the wind out of his treasuries.
Every man has become brutish, without knowledge. Every goldsmith is put to shame by his image, for his molten image is falsehood,  there is no breath in them.
They are vanity, a work of delusion. In the time of their visitation they shall perish.
The portion of Jacob is not like these, for he is the former of all things,  Israel is the tribe of his inheritance. Jehovah of hosts is his name.
Thou are my battle-axe and weapons of war. And with thee I will break in pieces the nations,  with thee I will destroy kingdoms,
with thee I will break in pieces the horse and his rider,
with thee I will break in pieces the chariot and him who rides in it,  with thee I will break in pieces man and woman,  with thee I will break in pieces the old man and the youth,  with thee I will break in pieces the young man and the virgin,
with thee I will break in pieces the shepherd and his flock,  with thee I will break in pieces the husbandman and his yoke of oxen,  with thee I will break in pieces governors and deputies.
I will render to Babylon and to all the inhabitants of Chaldea all their evil that they have done in Zion in your sight, says Jehovah.
Behold, I am against thee, O destroying mountain, says Jehovah, which destroys all the earth. And I will stretch out my hand upon thee,  roll thee down from the rocks,  will make thee a burnt mountain.
they shall not take from thee a stone for a corner, nor a stone for foundations,  thou shall be desolate forever, says Jehovah.
Set ye up a standard in the land. Blow the trumpet among the nations. Prepare the nations against her. Call together against her the kingdoms of Ararat, Minni,  Ashkenaz. Appoint a marshal against her. Cause the horses to come up as the rough canker-worm.
Prepare against her the nations, the kings of the Medes, the governors of it,  all the deputies of it,  all the land of their dominion.
the land trembles and is in pain, for the purposes of Jehovah against Babylon stand, to make the land of Babylon a desolation, without inhabitant.
The mighty men of Babylon have ceased fighting; they remain in their strongholds. Their might has failed. They have become as women. Her dwelling-places are set on fire. Her bars are broken.
One post shall run to meet another,  one messenger to met another, to show the king of Babylon that his city is taken on every quarter.
the passages are seized,  the reeds they have burned with fire,  the men of war are frightened.
For thus says Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: The daughter of Babylon is like a threshing-floor at the time when it is trodden. Yet a little while,  the time of harvest shall come for her.
Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon has devoured me. He has crushed me. He has made me an empty vessel. He has, like a monster, swallowed me up. He has filled his stomach with my delicacies. He has cast me out.
The violence done to me and to my flesh be upon Babylon, the inhabitant of Zion shall say. And, My blood be upon the inhabitants of Chaldea, Jerusalem shall say.
Therefore thus says Jehovah: Behold, I will plead thy cause,  take vengeance for thee. And I will dry up her sea,  make her fountain dry.
Babylon shall become heaps, a dwelling-place for jackals, an astonishment,  a hissing, without inhabitant.
They shall roar together like young lions. They shall growl as lions' whelps.
When they are heated, I will make their feast. And I will make them drunken, that they may rejoice,  sleep a perpetual sleep,  not wake, says Jehovah.
I will bring them down like lambs to the slaughter, like rams with he-goats.
How Sheshach is taken,  the praise of the whole earth seized! How Babylon has become a desolation among the nations!
The sea has come up upon Babylon. She is covered with the multitude of the waves thereof.
Her cities have become a desolation, a dry land,  a desert, a land in which no man dwells, nor does any son of man pass thereby.
I will execute judgment upon Bel in Babylon,  I will bring forth out of his mouth that which he has swallowed up. And the nations shall not flow any more to him. Yea, the wall of Babylon shall fall.
My people, go ye out of the midst of her,  save yourselves each man from the fierce anger of Jehovah.
let not your heart faint. Neither fear ye for the news that shall be heard in the land. For news shall come one year,  after that in another year, news,  violence in the land, ruler against ruler.
Therefore, behold, the days come, that I will execute judgment upon the graven images of Babylon. And her whole land shall be confounded,  all her slain shall fall in the midst of her.
Then the heavens and the earth,  all that is therein, shall sing for joy over Babylon. For the destroyers shall come to her from the north, says Jehovah.
As Babylon has caused the slain of Israel to fall, so at Babylon shall fall the slain of all the land.
Ye who have escaped the sword, go ye; do not stand still. Remember Jehovah from afar,  let Jerusalem come into your mind.
We are confounded, because we have heard reproach. Confusion has covered our faces. For strangers have come into the sanctuaries of Jehovah's house.
Therefore, behold, the days come, says Jehovah, that I will execute judgment upon her graven images,  through all her land the wounded shall groan.
Though Babylon should mount up to heaven,  though she should fortify the height of her strength, yet from me destroyers shall come to her, says Jehovah.
The sound of a cry from Babylon,  of great destruction from the land of the Chaldeans!
For Jehovah lays Babylon waste,  destroys the great voice out of her,  their waves roar like many waters; the noise of their voice is uttered.
For the destroyer has come upon her, even upon Babylon,  her mighty men are taken. Their bows are broken in pieces. For Jehovah is a God of recompenses; he will surely requite.
I will make drunk her rulers and her wise men, her governors and her deputies,  her mighty men. And they shall sleep a perpetual sleep,  not wake, says the King, whose name is Jehovah of hosts.
Thus says Jehovah of hosts: The broad walls of Babylon shall be utterly overthrown,  her high gates shall be burned with fire. And the peoples shall labor for vanity,  the nations for the fire,  they shall be weary.
The word which Jeremiah the prophet commanded Seraiah the son of Neriah, the son of Mahseiah, when he went with Zedekiah the king of Judah to Babylon in the fourth year of his reign. Now Seraiah was chief chamberlain.
Jeremiah wrote in a book all the evil that would come upon Babylon, even all these words that are written concerning Babylon.
Jeremiah said to Seraiah, When thou come to Babylon, then see that thou read all these words.
say, O Jehovah, thou have spoken concerning this place, to cut it off, that none shall dwell therein, neither man nor beast,  that it shall be desolate forever.
it shall be, when thou have made an end of reading this book, that thou shall bind a stone to it,  cast it into the midst of the Euphrates.
thou shall say, Thus Babylon shall sink,  shall not rise again because of the evil that I will bring upon her,  they shall be weary. Thus far are the words of Jeremiah.
Zedekiah was twenty-one years old when he began to reign,  he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Hamutal the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah.
he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah, according to all that Jehoiakim had done.
For it came to pass through the anger of Jehovah, in Jerusalem and Judah, until he had cast them out from his presence. And Zedekiah rebelled against the king of Babylon.
it came to pass in the ninth year of his reign, in the tenth month, in the tenth day of the month, that Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon came, he and all his army against Jerusalem,  encamped against it. And they built forts against it round about.
So the city was besieged to the eleventh year of king Zedekiah.
In the fourth month, in the ninth day of the month, the famine was severe in the city, so that there was no bread for the people of the land.
Then a breach was made in the city,  all the men of war fled,  went forth out of the city by night by the way of the gate between the two walls, which was by the king's garden, (now the Chaldeans were against the city round about),  they went toward the Arabah.
But the army of the Chaldeans pursued after the king,  overtook Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho,  all his army was scattered from him.
Then they took the king,  carried him up to the king of Babylon to Riblah in the land of Hamath,  he gave judgment upon him.
the king of Babylon killed the sons of Zedekiah before his eyes. He also killed all the rulers of Judah in Riblah.
he put out the eyes of Zedekiah. And the king of Babylon bound him in fetters,  carried him to Babylon,  put him in prison till the day of his death.
Now in the fifth month, in the tenth day of the month, which was the nineteenth year of king Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon, Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard, who stood before the king of Babylon, came into Jerusalem.
he burned the house of Jehovah,  the king's house,  all the houses of Jerusalem. Even every great house, he burned with fire.
all the army of the Chaldeans, who were with the captain of the guard, broke down all the walls of Jerusalem round about.
Then Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard carried away captive of the poorest of the people,  the residue of the people who were left in the city,  those who fell away, who fell to the king of Babylon,  the residue of the multitude.
But Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard left of the poorest of the land to be vinedressers and husbandmen.
the pillars of brass that were in the house of Jehovah,  the bases and the brazen sea that were in the house of Jehovah, the Chaldeans broke in pieces,  carried all the brass of them to Babylon.
The pots also,  the shovels,  the snuffers,  the basins,  the spoons,  all the vessels of brass with which they ministered, they took away.
the cups,  the fire pans,  the basins,  the pots,  the lampstands,  the spoons,  the bowls-that which was of gold, in gold,  that which was of silver, in silver-the captain of the guard took away.
The two pillars, the one sea,  the twelve brazen bulls that were under the bases, which king Solomon had made for the house of Jehovah-the brass of all these vessels was without weight.
as for the pillars, the height of the one pillar was eighteen cubits,  a line of twelve cubits encompassed it,  the thickness of it was four fingers; it was hollow.
a capital of brass was upon it. And the height of the one capital was five cubits, with network and pomegranates upon the capital round about, all of brass. And the second pillar also had like these,  pomegranates.
there were ninety-six pomegranates on the sides. All the pomegranates were a hundred upon the network round about.
the captain of the guard took Seraiah the chief priest,  Zephaniah the second priest,  the three keepers of the threshold.
from the city he took an officer who was set over the men of war,  seven men of those who saw the king's face, who were found in the city,  the scribe of the captain of the army who mustered the people of the land,  sixty men of the people of the land who were found in the midst of the city.
Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard took them,  brought them to the king of Babylon to Riblah.
the king of Babylon smote them,  put them to death at Riblah in the land of Hamath. So Judah was carried away captive out of his land.
This is the people whom Nebuchadrezzar carried away captive: In the seventh year three thousand twenty-three Jews.
In the eighteenth year of Nebuchadrezzar he carried away captive from Jerusalem eight hundred thirty-two persons.
In the twenty-third year of Nebuchadrezzar Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard carried away captive of the Jews seven hundred forty-five persons. All the persons were four thousand six hundred.
it came to pass in the thirty-seventh year of the captivity of Jehoiachin king of Judah, in the twelfth month, in the twenty-fifth day of the month, that Evil-merodach king of Babylon, in the first year of his reign, lifted up the head of Jehoiachin king of Judah,  brought him forth out of prison.
he spoke kindly to him,  set his throne above the throne of the kings who were with him in Babylon,
changed his prison garments. And he ate bread before him continually all the days of his life.
for his allowance, there was a continual allowance given him by the king of Babylon, every day a portion until the day of his death, all the days of his life.
Lamentations
How the city sits solitary, that was full of people! She has become as a widow, who was great among the nations! She who was a princess among the provinces has become tributary!
She weeps bitterly in the night,  her tears are on her cheeks. Among all her loved ones she has none to comfort her. All her friends have dealt treacherously with her, they have become her enemies.
Judah has gone into captivity because of affliction. And because of great servitude she dwells among the nations. She finds no rest. All her persecutors overtook her in the distress.
The ways of Zion mourn, because none come to the solemn assembly. All her gates are desolate. Her priests sigh. Her virgins are afflicted,  she herself is in bitterness.
Her adversaries have become the head. Her enemies prosper. For Jehovah has afflicted her for the multitude of her transgressions. Her young sons have gone into captivity before the adversary.
from the daughter of Zion all her majesty is departed. Her rulers have become like harts that find no pasture. And they have gone without strength before the pursuer.
Jerusalem remembers in the days of her affliction and of her miseries all her pleasant things that were from the days of old. When her people fell into the hand of the adversary,  none helped her, the adversaries saw her; they mocked at her desolations.
Jerusalem has grievously sinned, therefore she has become as an unclean thing. All who honored her despise her, because they have seen her nakedness. Yea, she sighs,  turns backward.
Her filthiness was in her skirts. She did not think of her latter end. Therefore she has come down astonishingly. She has no comforter. Behold, O Jehovah, my affliction, for the enemy has magnified himself.
The adversary has spread out his hand upon all her pleasant things. For she has seen that the nations have entered into her sanctuary, concerning whom thou commanded that they should not enter into thine assembly.
All her people sigh. They seek bread. They have given their pleasant things for food to refresh the soul. See, O Jehovah, , behold, for I have become abject.
Is it nothing to you, all ye who pass by? Behold,  see if there is any sorrow like my sorrow, which is brought upon me. Therewith Jehovah has afflicted in the day of his fierce anger.
From on high he has sent fire into my bones,  it prevails against them. He has spread a net for my feet. He has turned me back. He has made me desolate and faint all the day.
The yoke of my transgressions is bound by his hand. They are knit together. They have come up upon my neck. He has made my strength to fail. The Lord has delivered me into their hands, against whom I am not able to stand.
The Lord has trodden under foot all my mighty men in the midst of me. He has called a solemn assembly against me to crush my young men. The Lord has trodden the virgin daughter of Judah as in a winepress.
For these things I weep. My eye, my eye runs down with water, because the comforter who should refresh my soul is far from me. My sons are desolate, because the enemy has prevailed.
Zion spreads forth her hands. There is none to comfort her. Jehovah has commanded concerning Jacob, that those who are round about him should be his adversaries. Jerusalem is among them as an unclean thing.
Jehovah is righteous, for I have rebelled against his commandment. Hear, I pray you, all ye peoples,  behold my sorrow. My virgins and my young men have gone into captivity.
I called for my loved ones,  they deceived me. My priests and my elders gave up the spirit in the city, while they sought food for themselves to refresh their souls.
Behold, O Jehovah, for I am in distress. My heart is troubled. My heart is turned within me. For I have grievously rebelled. Abroad the sword bereaves; at home there is as death.
They have heard that I sigh. There is none to comfort me. All my enemies have heard of my trouble. They are glad that thou have done it. Thou will bring the day that thou have proclaimed,  they shall be like me.
Let all their wickedness come before thee,  do to them, as thou have done to me for all my transgressions. For my sighs are many,  my heart is faint.
How the Lord has covered the daughter of Zion with a cloud in his anger! He has cast down the beauty of Israel from heaven to the earth,  has not remembered his footstool in the day of his anger.
The Lord has swallowed up all the habitations of Jacob,  has not pitied. In his wrath he has thrown down the strongholds of the daughter of Judah. He has brought them down to the ground. He has profaned the kingdom and the rulers thereof.
In fierce anger he has cut off all the horn of Israel. He has drawn back his right hand from before the enemy. And he has burned up Jacob like a flaming fire which devours round about.
He has bent his bow like an enemy. He has stood with his right hand as an adversary,  has slain all who were pleasant to the eye. He has poured out his wrath like fire in the tent of the daughter of Zion.
The Lord has become as an enemy. He has swallowed up Israel. He has swallowed up all her palaces. He has destroyed his strongholds. And he has multiplied mourning and lamentation in the daughter of Judah.
he has taken away his tabernacle violently, as a garden. He has destroyed his place of assembly. Jehovah has caused solemn assembly and sabbath to be forgotten in Zion. And in the indignation of his anger has despised the king and the priest.
The Lord has cast off his altar. He has abhorred his sanctuary. He has given up the walls of her palaces into the hand of the enemy. They have made a noise in the house of Jehovah, as in the day of a solemn assembly.
Jehovah has purposed to destroy the wall of the daughter of Zion. He has stretched out the line. He has not withdrawn his hand from destroying. And he has made the rampart and wall to lament, they languish together.
Her gates are sunk into the ground. He has destroyed and broken her bars. Her king and her rulers are among the nations where the law is not. Yea, her prophets find no vision from Jehovah.
The elders of the daughter of Zion sit upon the ground. They keep silence. They have cast up dust upon their heads. They have girded themselves with sackcloth. The virgins of Jerusalem hang down their heads to the ground.
My eyes fail with tears, my heart is troubled, my liver is poured upon the earth, because of the destruction of the daughter of my people, because the young sons and the sucklings faint in the streets of the city.
They say to their mothers, Where is grain and wine? when they faint as the wounded in the streets of the city, when their soul is poured out into their mothers' bosom.
What shall I testify to thee? What shall I liken to thee, O daughter of Jerusalem? What shall I compare to thee, that I may comfort thee, O virgin daughter of Zion? For thy breach is great like the sea; who can heal thee?
Thy prophets have seen false and foolish visions for thee. And they have not uncovered thine iniquity, to bring back thy captivity,  have seen for thee false oracles and causes of banishment.
All who pass by clap their hands at thee. They hiss and wag their head at the daughter of Jerusalem, saying, Is this the city that men called The perfection of beauty, The joy of the whole earth?
All thine enemies have opened their mouth wide against thee. They hiss and gnash the teeth. They say, We have swallowed her up. Certainly this is the day that we looked for. We have found, we have seen it.
Jehovah has done that which he purposed. He has fulfilled his word that he commanded in the days of old. He has thrown down,  has not pitied. And he has caused the enemy to rejoice over thee. He has exalted the horn of thine adversaries.
Their heart cried to the Lord. O wall of the daughter of Zion, let tears run down like a river day and night. Give thyself no respite. Let not the apple of thine eye cease.
Arise, cry out in the night, at the beginning of the watches. Pour out thy heart like water before the face of the Lord. Lift up thy hands toward him for the life of thy young sons, who faint for hunger at the head of every street.
See, O Jehovah,  behold to whom thou have done thus! Shall the women eat their fruit, the sons who are dandled in the hands? Shall the priest and the prophet be slain in the sanctuary of the Lord?
The youth and the old man lie on the ground in the streets. My virgins and my young men have fallen by the sword. Thou have slain them in the day of thine anger. Thou have slaughtered,  not pitied.
Thou have called, as in the day of a solemn assembly, my terrors on every side. And there was none who escaped or remained in the day of Jehovah's anger. My enemy has consumed those whom I have dandled and brought up.
I am the man who has seen affliction by the rod of his wrath.
He has led me and caused me to walk in darkness,  not in light.
Surely he turns his hand against me, again and again all the day.
He has made my flesh and my skin old. He has broken my bones.
He has built against me,  encompassed me with gall and travail.
He has made me to dwell in dark places, as those who have long been dead.
He has walled me around, that I cannot go forth. He has made my chain heavy.
Yea, when I cry,  call for help, he shuts out my prayer.
He has walled up my ways with hewn stone. He has made my paths crooked.
He is to me as a bear lying in wait, as a lion in concealed places.
He has turned aside my ways,  pulled me in pieces. He has made me desolate.
He has bent his bow,  set me as a mark for the arrow.
He has caused the shafts of his quiver to enter into my reins.
I have become a derision to all my people,  their song all the day.
He has filled me with bitterness. He has sated me with wormwood.
He has also broken my teeth with gravel stones. He has covered me with ashes.
thou have removed my soul far off from peace. I forgot prosperity.
I said, My strength is perished,  my expectation from Jehovah.
Remember my affliction and my misery, the wormwood and the gall.
My soul still has them in remembrance,  is bowed down within me.
This I recall to my mind, therefore I have hope:
It is of Jehovah's loving kindnesses that we are not consumed, because his compassions do not fail.
They are new every morning. Great is thy faithfulness.
Jehovah is my portion, says my soul, therefore I will hope in him.
Jehovah is good to those who wait for him, to the soul who seeks him.
It is good that a man should hope and quietly wait for the salvation of Jehovah.
It is good for a man that he bear the yoke in his youth.
Let him sit alone and keep silence, because he has laid it upon him.
Let him put his mouth in the dust, if so be there may be hope.
Let him give his cheek to him who smites him. Let him be filled full with reproach.
For the Lord will not cast off forever.
For though he causes grief, yet he will have compassion according to the multitude of his loving kindnesses.
For he does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the sons of men.
To crush under foot all the prisoners of the earth,
to turn aside the right of a man before the face of the Most High,
to subvert a man in his cause, the Lord does not approve.
Who is he that says,  it comes to pass, when the Lord does not command it?
Out of the mouth of the Most High does there not come evil and good?
Why does a living man complain, a man for the punishment of his sins?
Let us search and try our ways,  turn again to Jehovah.
Let us lift up our heart with our hands to God in the heavens.
We have transgressed and have rebelled. Thou have not pardoned.
Thou have covered with anger and pursued us. Thou have slain; thou have not pitied.
Thou have covered thyself with a cloud, so that no prayer can pass through.
Thou have made us an off-scouring and refuse in the midst of the peoples.
All our enemies have opened their mouth wide against us.
Fear and the pit have come upon us, devastation and destruction.
My eye runs down with streams of water, for the destruction of the daughter of my people.
My eye pours down,  does not cease, without any intermission,
till Jehovah looks down,  beholds from heaven.
My eye stirs my soul, because of all the daughters of my city.
They have chased me grievously like a bird, those who are my enemies without cause.
They have cut off my life in the dungeon,  have cast a stone upon me.
Waters flowed over my head. I said, I am cut off.
I called upon thy name, O Jehovah, out of the lowest dungeon.
Thou heard my voice. Hide not thine ear at my breathing, at my cry.
Thou drew near in the day that I called upon thee. Thou said, Fear not.
O Lord, thou have pleaded the causes of my soul. Thou have redeemed my life.
O Jehovah, thou have seen my wrong. Judge thou my cause.
Thou have seen all their vengeance and all their devices against me.
Thou have heard their reproach, O Jehovah,  all their devices against me,
the lips of those who rose up against me,  their device against me all the day.
Behold thou their sitting down,  their rising up. I am their song.
Thou will render to them a recompense, O Jehovah, according to the work of their hands.
Thou will give them hardness of heart, thy curse to them.
Thou will pursue them in anger,  destroy them from under the heavens of Jehovah.
How the gold has become dim, the most pure gold changed! The stones of the sanctuary are poured out at the head of every street.
The precious sons of Zion, comparable to fine gold, how they are esteemed as earthen pitchers, the work of the hands of the potter!
Even the jackals draw out the breast; they give suck to their young ones. The daughter of my people has become cruel, like the ostriches in the wilderness.
The tongue of the sucking child clings to the roof of his mouth for thirst. The young sons ask bread,  no man breaks it to them.
Those who fed luxuriously are desolate in the streets. Those who were brought up in scarlet embrace dunghills.
For the iniquity of the daughter of my people is greater than the sin of Sodom, that was overthrown as in a moment,  no hands were laid upon her.
Her ranking men were purer than snow. They were whiter than milk. They were more ruddy in body than rubies. Their polishing was as of sapphire.
Their visage is blacker than a coal. They are not known in the streets. Their skin clings to their bones. It is withered. It has become like a stick.
Those who are slain with the sword are better than those who are slain with hunger, for these pine away, stricken through, for want of the fruits of the field.
The hands of the pitiful women have boiled their own children. They were their food in the destruction of the daughter of my people.
Jehovah has accomplished his wrath. He has poured out his fierce anger,  he has kindled a fire in Zion, which has devoured the foundations thereof.
The kings of the earth did not believe, nor all the inhabitants of the world, that the adversary and the enemy would enter into the gates of Jerusalem.
It is because of the sins of her prophets,  the iniquities of her priests, who have shed the blood of the just in the midst of her.
They wander as blind men in the streets. They are polluted with blood, so that men cannot touch their garments.
Depart ye, they cried to them. Unclean! Depart, depart, do not touch! When they fled away and wandered, men said among the nations, They shall no more sojourn here.
The anger of Jehovah has scattered them. He will no more regard them. They did not respect the persons of the priests. They did not favor the elders.
Our eyes do yet fail in looking for our vain help. In our watching we have watched for a nation that could not save.
They hunt our steps, so that we cannot go in our streets. Our end is near, our days are fulfilled, for our end has come.
Our pursuers were swifter than the eagles of the heavens. They chased us upon the mountains. They laid wait for us in the wilderness.
The breath of our nostrils, the anointed of Jehovah, was taken in their pits, of whom we said, Under his shadow we shall live among the nations.
Rejoice and be glad, O daughter of Edom, who dwells in the land of Uz. Yet the cup shall pass through to thee also. Thou shall be drunken,  shall make thyself naked.
The punishment of thine iniquity is accomplished, O daughter of Zion. He will no more carry thee away into captivity. He will visit thine iniquity, O daughter of Edom. He will uncover thy sins.
Remember, O Jehovah, what has come upon us. Behold,  see our reproach.
Our inheritance is turned to strangers, our houses to aliens.
We are orphans and fatherless. Our mothers are as widows.
We have drunken our water for money. Our wood is sold to us.
Our pursuers are upon our necks. We are weary,  have no rest.
We have given the hand to the Egyptians,  to the Assyrians, to be satisfied with bread.
Our fathers sinned,  are not,  we have borne their iniquities.
Servants rule over us. There is none to deliver us out of their hand.
We get our bread at the peril of our lives, because of the sword of the wilderness.
Our skin is black like an oven, because of the burning heat of famine.
They ravished the women in Zion, the virgins in the cities of Judah.
Rulers were hanged up by their hand. The faces of elders were not honored.
The young men bore the mill,  the sons stumbled under the wood.
The elders have ceased from the gate, the young men from their music.
The joy of our heart is ceased, our dance is turned into mourning.
The crown has fallen from our head. Woe to us! For we have sinned.
For this our heart is faint. For these things our eyes are dim,
for the mountain of Zion, which is desolate. The foxes walk upon it.
Thou, O Jehovah, abide forever. Thy throne is from generation to generation.
Why do thou forget us forever,  forsake us so long time?
Turn thou us back to thee, O Jehovah,  we shall be turned back. Renew our days as of old.
But thou have utterly rejected us. Thou are very angry against us.
Ezekiel
Ezek. Now it came to pass in the thirtieth year, in the fourth month, in the fifth day of the month, as I was among the captives by the river Chebar, that the heavens were opened,  I saw visions of God.
Ezek. In the fifth day of the month, which was the fifth year of king Jehoiachin's captivity,
Ezek. the word of Jehovah came expressly to Ezekiel the priest, the son of Buzi, in the land of the Chaldeans by the river Chebar,  the hand of Jehovah was there upon him.
Ezek. And I looked, , behold, a stormy wind came out of the north, a great cloud, with a fire enfolding itself,  a brightness round about it,  out of the midst of it, as it were glowing metal, out of the midst of the fire.
Ezek. And out of the midst of it came the likeness of four living creatures. And this was their appearance. They had the likeness of a man.
Ezek. And each one had four faces,  each one of them had four wings.
Ezek. And their feet were straight feet,  the sole of their feet was like the sole of a calf's foot,  they sparkled like burnished brass.
Ezek. And they had the hands of a man under their wings on their four sides. And those four had their faces and their wings thus:
Ezek. Their wings were joined one to another. They did not turn when they went; they went each one straight forward.
Ezek. As for the likeness of their faces, they had the face of a man. And those four had the face of a lion on the right side,  those four had the face of an ox on the left side, those four also had the face of an eagle.
Ezek. And their faces and their wings were separate above, two wings of each one were joined one to another,  two covered their bodies.
Ezek. And they went each one straight forward. Where the spirit was to go, they went. They did not turn when they went.
Ezek. As for the likeness of the living creatures, their appearance was like burning coals of fire, like the appearance of torches. It went up and down among the living creatures,  the fire was bright,  out of the fire went forth lightning.
Ezek. And the living creatures ran and returned as the appearance of a flash of lightning.
Ezek. Now as I beheld the living creatures, behold, one wheel was upon the earth beside the living creatures, for each of the four faces of it.
Ezek. The appearance of the wheels and their work was like a beryl. And those four had one likeness,  their appearance and their work was as it were a wheel within a wheel.
Ezek. When they went, they went in their four directions. They did not turn when they went.
Ezek. As for their rims, they were high and fearful. And those four had their rims full of eyes round about.
Ezek. And when the living creatures went, the wheels went beside them. And when the living creatures were lifted up from the earth, the wheels were lifted up.
Ezek. Wherever the spirit was to go, they went; there the spirit was to go. And the wheels were lifted up beside them, for the spirit of the living creature was in the wheels.
Ezek. When those went, these went,  when those stood, these stood,  when those were lifted up from the earth, the wheels were lifted up beside them, for the spirit of the living creature was in the wheels.
Ezek. And over the head of the living creature there was the likeness of a firmament, like awesome crystal to look upon, stretched forth over their heads above.
Ezek. And under the firmament their wings were straight, the one toward the other. Each one had two which covered their bodies on this side,  each one had two which covered on that side.
Ezek. And when they went, I heard the noise of their wings like the noise of great waters, like the voice of the Almighty, a noise of tumult like the noise of a host. When they stood, they let down their wings.
Ezek. And there was a voice above the firmament that was over their heads. When they stood, they let down their wings.
Ezek. And above the firmament that was over their heads was the likeness of a throne, as the appearance of a sapphire stone. And upon the likeness of the throne was a likeness as the appearance of a man upon it above.
Ezek. And I saw as it were glowing metal, as the appearance of fire within it round about, from the appearance of his loins and upward. And from the appearance of his loins and downward I saw as it were the appearance of fire. And there was brightness round about him.
Ezek. As the appearance of the bow that is in the cloud in the day of rain, so was the appearance of the brightness round about. This was the appearance of the likeness of the glory of Jehovah. And when I saw it, I fell upon my face,  I heard a voice speaking.
Ezek. And he said to me, Son of man, stand upon thy feet,  I will speak with thee.
Ezek. And the Spirit entered into me when he spoke to me,  set me upon my feet. And I heard him who spoke to me.
Ezek. And he said to me, Son of man, I send thee to the sons of Israel, to nations that are rebellious, which have rebelled against me. They and their fathers have transgressed against me even to this very day.
Ezek. And the sons are impudent and stiff hearted. I send thee to them,  thou shall say to them, Thus says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. And they, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear (for they are a rebellious house), yet shall know that there has been a prophet among them.
Ezek. And thou, son of man, be not afraid of them, nor be afraid of their words, though briers and thorns are with thee,  thou dwell among scorpions. Be not afraid of their words, nor be dismayed at their looks, though they are a rebellious house.
Ezek. And thou shall speak my words to them, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear, for they are most rebellious.
Ezek. But thou, son of man, hear what I say to thee. Be not thou rebellious like that rebellious house. Open thy mouth,  eat that which I give thee.
Ezek. And when I looked, behold, a hand was put forth to me, , lo, a roll of a book was in it,
Ezek. And he spread it before me,  it was written inside and outside. And there were written in it lamentations and mourning and woe.
Ezek. And he said to me, Son of man, eat that which thou find. Eat this roll,  go, speak to the house of Israel.
Ezek. So I opened my mouth,  he caused me to eat the roll.
Ezek. And he said to me, Son of man, cause thy belly to eat,  fill thy bowels with this roll that I give thee. Then I ate it,  it was in my mouth as honey for sweetness.
Ezek. And he said to me, Son of man, go, get thee to the house of Israel,  speak to them with my words.
Ezek. For thou are not sent to a people of a strange speech and of a hard language,  to the house of Israel,
Ezek. not to many peoples of a strange speech,  of a hard language, whose words thou cannot understand. Surely, if I sent thee to them, they would hearken to thee.
Ezek. But the house of Israel will not hearken to thee, for they will not hearken to me. For all the house of Israel are of a hard forehead and of a stiff heart.
Ezek. Behold, I have made thy face hard against their faces,  thy forehead hard against their foreheads.
Ezek. As an adamant, harder than flint, I have made thy forehead. Fear them not, nor be dismayed at their looks, though they are a rebellious house.
Ezek. Moreover he said to me, Son of man, all my words that I shall speak to thee, receive in thy heart,  hear with thine ears.
Ezek. And go, get thee to those of the captivity, to the sons of thy people,  speak to them,  tell them, Thus says the lord Jehovah, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear.
Ezek. Then the Spirit lifted me up,  I heard behind me the voice of a great rushing, saying, Blessed be the glory of Jehovah from his place.
Ezek. And I heard the noise of the wings of the living creatures as they touched each other,  the noise of the wheels beside them, even the noise of a great rushing.
Ezek. So the Spirit lifted me up,  took me away. And I went in bitterness, in the heat of my spirit,  the hand of Jehovah was strong upon me.
Ezek. Then I came to those of the captivity at Tel-abib, who dwelt by the river Chebar,  to where they dwelt. And I sat there overwhelmed among them seven days.
Ezek. And it came to pass at the end of seven days, that the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Ezek. Son of man, I have made thee a watchman to the house of Israel. Therefore hear the word at my mouth,  give them warning from me.
Ezek. When I say to a wicked man, Thou shall surely die,  thou give him no warning, nor speak to warn the wicked man from his wicked way, to save his life, the same wicked man shall die in his iniquity,  I will require his blood at thy hand.
Ezek. Yet if thou warn the wicked man,  he does not turn from his wickedness, nor from his wicked way, he shall die in his iniquity,  thou have delivered thy soul.
Ezek. Again, when a righteous man turns from his righteousness,  commits iniquity,  I lay a stumbling block before him, he shall die. Because thou have not given him warning, he shall die in his sin,  his righteous deeds which he has done shall not be remembered,  I will require his blood at thy hand.
Ezek. Nevertheless if thou warn the righteous man, that the righteous man not sin,  he does not sin, he shall surely live, because he took warning,  thou have delivered thy soul.
Ezek. And the hand of Jehovah was there upon me,  he said to me, Arise, go forth into the plain,  I will talk with thee there.
Ezek. Then I arose,  went forth into the plain. And, behold, the glory of Jehovah stood there, as the glory which I saw by the river Chebar,  I fell on my face.
Ezek. Then the Spirit entered into me,  set me upon my feet. And he spoke with me,  said to me, Go, shut thyself within thy house.
Ezek. But thou, son of man, behold, they shall lay bands upon thee,  shall bind thee with them,  thou shall not escape from them.
Ezek. And I will make thy tongue cling to the roof of thy mouth, that thou shall be mute,  shall not be a reprover to them, for they are a rebellious house.
Ezek. But when I speak with thee, I will open thy mouth,  thou shall say to them, Thus says the lord Jehovah. He who hears, let him hear,  he who forbears, let him forbear, for they are a rebellious house.
Ezek. Thou also, son of man, take thee a tile,  lay it before thee,  portray upon it a city, even Jerusalem.
Ezek. And lay siege against it,  build forts against it,  cast up a mound against it. Also set camps against it,  plant battering rams against it round about.
Ezek. And take thou to thee an iron pan,  set it for a wall of iron between thee and the city. And set thy face toward it,  it shall be besieged,  thou shall lay siege against it. This shall be a sign to the house of Israel.
Ezek. Moreover lie thou upon thy left side,  lay the iniquity of the house of Israel upon it. According to the number of the days that thou shall lie upon it, thou shall bear their iniquity.
Ezek. For I have appointed the years of their iniquity to be a number of days to thee, even three hundred and ninety days. So thou shall bear the iniquity of the house of Israel.
Ezek. And again, when thou have accomplished these, thou shall lie on thy right side,  shall bear the iniquity of the house of Judah forty days, each day for a year. I have appointed it to thee.
Ezek. And thou shall set thy face toward the siege of Jerusalem, with thine arm uncovered,  thou shall prophesy against it.
Ezek. And, behold, I lay bands upon thee,  thou shall not turn thee from one side to the other, till thou have accomplished the days of thy siege.
Ezek. Also take thou to thee wheat,  barley,  beans,  lentils,  millet,  spelt,  put them in one vessel,  make thee bread of it, according to the number of the days that thou shall lie upon thy side, even three hundred and ninety days, thou shall eat of it.
Ezek. And thy food which thou shall eat shall be by weight, twenty shekels a day. Thou shall eat it from time to time.
Ezek. And thou shall drink water by measure, the sixth part of a hin. Thou shall drink from time to time.
Ezek. And thou shall eat it as barley cakes,  thou shall bake it in their sight with dung that comes out of man.
Ezek. And Jehovah said, Even thus shall the sons of Israel eat their bread unclean among the nations where I will drive them.
Ezek. Then I said, Ah lord Jehovah! Behold, my soul has not been polluted. For from my youth up even till now I have not eaten of that which dies of itself, or is torn of beasts, neither has abominable flesh come into my mouth.
Ezek. Then he said to me, See, I have given thee cow's dung for man's dung,  thou shall prepare thy bread of it.
Ezek. Moreover he said to me, Son of man, behold, I will break the staff of bread in Jerusalem,  they shall eat bread by weight,  with fearfulness,  they shall drink water by measure,  in dismay,
Ezek. that they may lack bread and water,  be dismayed one with another,  pine away in their iniquity.
Ezek. And thou, son of man, take thee a sharp sword. As a barber's razor thou shall take it to thee,  shall cause it to pass upon thy head and upon thy beard. Then take thee balances to weigh and divide the hair.
Ezek. A third part thou shall burn in the fire in the midst of the city when the days of the siege are fulfilled,  thou shall take a third part,  smite with the sword round about it,  a third part thou shall scatter to the wind. And I will draw out a sword after them.
Ezek. And thou shall take from it a few in number,  bind them in thy skirts.
Ezek. And of these again thou shall take,  cast them into the midst of the fire,  burn them in the fire. From there a fire shall come forth into all the house of Israel.
Ezek. Thus says the lord Jehovah: This is Jerusalem. I have set her in the midst of the nations,  countries are round about her.
Ezek. And she has rebelled against my ordinances in doing wickedness more than the nations,  against my statutes more than the countries that are round about her, for they have rejected my ordinances,  as for my statutes, they have not walked in them.
Ezek. Therefore thus says the lord Jehovah: Because ye are more disorderly than the nations that are round about you,  have not walked in my statutes, nor have kept my ordinances, no, ye have not even done according to the ordinances of the nations that are round about you,
Ezek. therefore thus says the lord Jehovah: Behold, I, even I, am against thee,  I will execute judgments in the midst of thee in the sight of the nations.
Ezek. And I will do in thee that which I have not done,  of which I will not do any more the like, because of all thine abominations.
Ezek. Therefore the fathers shall eat the sons in the midst of thee,  the sons shall eat their fathers. And I will execute judgments on thee,  I will scatter to all the winds the whole remnant of thee.
Ezek. Therefore, as I live, says the lord Jehovah, surely, because thou have defiled my sanctuary with all thy detestable things,  with all thine abominations, therefore I also will diminish thee, nor shall my eye spare. And I also will have no pity.
Ezek. A third part of thee shall die with the pestilence,  they shall be consumed with famine in the midst of thee,  a third part shall fall by the sword round about thee,  a third part I will scatter to all the winds,  will draw out a sword after them.
Ezek. Thus my anger shall be accomplished,  I will cause my wrath toward them to rest,  I shall be comforted. And they shall know that I, Jehovah, have spoken in my zeal, when I have accomplished my wrath upon them.
Ezek. Moreover I will make thee a desolation and a reproach among the nations that are round about thee, in the sight of all who pass by.
Ezek. So it shall be a reproach and a taunt, a lesson and an astonishment, to the nations that are round about thee, when I shall execute judgments on thee in anger and in wrath,  in wrathful rebukes-I, Jehovah, have spoken it-
Ezek. when I shall send upon them the evil arrows of famine that are for destruction, which I will send to destroy you. And I will increase the famine upon you,  will break your staff of bread.
Ezek. And I will send upon you famine and evil beasts,  they shall bereave thee. And pestilence and blood shall pass through thee. And I will bring the sword upon thee. I, Jehovah, have spoken it.
Ezek. And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Ezek. Son of man, set thy face toward the mountains of Israel,  prophesy to them,
Ezek. and say, Ye mountains of Israel, hear the word of lord Jehovah. Thus says the lord Jehovah to the mountains and to the hills, to the watercourses and to the valleys: Behold, I, even I, will bring a sword upon you,  I will destroy your high places.
Ezek. And your altars shall become desolate,  your sun-images shall be broken,  I will cast down your slain men before your idols.
Ezek. And I will lay the dead bodies of the sons of Israel before their idols,  I will scatter your bones round about your altars.
Ezek. In all your dwelling places the cities shall be laid waste,  the high places shall be desolate, that your altars may be laid waste and made desolate,  your idols may be broken and cease,  your sun-images may be hewn down,  your works may be abolished.
Ezek. And the slain shall fall in the midst of you. And ye shall know that I am Jehovah.
Ezek. Yet I will leave a remnant, in that ye shall have some who escape the sword among the nations, when ye shall be scattered through the countries.
Ezek. And those of you who escape shall remember me among the nations where they shall be carried captive, how I have broken with their lewd heart, which has departed from me,  with their eyes, which play the harlot after their idols. And they shall loathe themselves in their own sight for the evils which they have committed in all their abominations.
Ezek. And they shall know that I am Jehovah. I have not said in vain that I would do this evil to them.
Ezek. Thus says the lord Jehovah: Smite with thy hand,  stamp with thy foot,  say, Alas! because of all the evil abominations of the house of Israel, for they shall fall by the sword, by the famine,  by the pestilence.
Ezek. He who is far off shall die of the pestilence,  he who is near shall fall by the sword,  he who remains and is besieged shall die by the famine. Thus I will accomplish my wrath upon them.
Ezek. And ye shall know that I am Jehovah when their slain men shall be among their idols round about their altars, upon every high hill, on all the tops of the mountains,  under every green tree,  under every thick oak, the places where they offered sweet savor to all their idols.
Ezek. And I will stretch out my hand upon them,  make the land desolate and waste, from the wilderness toward Diblah, throughout all their habitations. And they shall know that I am Jehovah.
Ezek. Moreover the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Ezek. And thou, son of man, thus says the lord Jehovah to the land of Israel: An end. The end has come upon the four corners of the land.
Ezek. Now the end is upon thee,  I will send my anger upon thee,  will judge thee according to thy ways. And I will bring upon thee all thine abominations.
Ezek. And my eye shall not spare thee, nor will I have pity. But I will bring thy ways upon thee,  thine abominations shall be in the midst of thee. And ye shall know that I am Jehovah.
Ezek. Thus says the lord Jehovah: An evil, an only evil, behold, it comes.
Ezek. An end has come. The end has come. It awakens against thee. Behold, it comes.
Ezek. Thy doom has come to thee, O inhabitant of the land. The time has come. The day is near, tumult,  not joyful shouting, upon the mountains.
Ezek. Now I will shortly pour out my wrath upon thee,  accomplish my anger against thee,  will judge thee according to thy ways. And I will bring upon thee all thine abominations.
Ezek. And my eye shall not spare, nor will I have pity. I will bring upon thee according to thy ways. And thine abominations shall be in the midst of thee. And ye shall know that I, Jehovah, do smite.
Ezek. Behold, the day, behold, it comes. Thy doom has gone forth. The rod has blossomed; pride has budded.
Ezek. Violence has risen up into a rod of wickedness. None of them shall remain, nor of their multitude, nor of their wealth. Neither shall there be eminency among them.
Ezek. The time has come; the day draws near. Let not the buyer rejoice, nor the seller mourn, for wrath is upon all the multitude of it.
Ezek. For the seller shall not return to that which is sold, although they be yet alive, for the vision is concerning the whole multitude of it. None shall return, nor shall any strengthen himself in the iniquity of his life.
Ezek. They have blown the trumpet,  have made all ready,  none goes to the battle, for my wrath is upon all the multitude of it.
Ezek. The sword is outside,  the pestilence and the famine inside. He who is in the field shall die with the sword,  he who is in the city, famine and pestilence shall devour him.
Ezek. But those of them who escape shall escape,  shall be on the mountains like doves of the valleys. All of them moaning, each one in his iniquity.
Ezek. All hands shall be feeble,  all knees shall be weak as water.
Ezek. They shall also gird themselves with sackcloth,  horror shall cover them. And shame shall be upon all faces,  baldness upon all their heads.
Ezek. They shall cast their silver in the streets,  their gold shall be as an unclean thing. Their silver and their gold shall not be able to deliver them in the day of the wrath of Jehovah. They shall not satisfy their souls, nor fill their bowels, because it has been the stumbling block of their iniquity.
Ezek. As for the beauty of his ornament, he set it in majesty,  they made the images of their abominations,  their detestable things in it. Therefore I have made it as an unclean thing to them.
Ezek. And I will give it into the hands of the strangers for a prey,  to the wicked of the earth for a spoil,  they shall profane it.
Ezek. I will also turn my face from them,  they shall profane my secluded place. And robbers shall enter into it,  profane it.
Ezek. Make the chain, for the land is full of bloody crimes,  the city is full of violence.
Ezek. Therefore I will bring the worst of the nations,  they shall possess their houses. I will also make the pride of the strong to cease,  their holy places shall be profaned.
Ezek. Destruction comes. And they shall seek peace,  there shall be none.
Ezek. Mischief shall come upon mischief,  rumor shall be upon rumor. And they shall seek a vision of the prophet,  the law shall perish from the priest,  counsel from the elders.
Ezek. The king shall mourn,  the ruler shall be clothed with desolation,  the hands of the people of the land shall be troubled. I will do to them according to their way,  according to their deserts I will judge them. And they shall know that I am Jehovah.
Ezek. And it came to pass in the sixth year, in the sixth month, in the fifth day of the month, as I sat in my house,  the elders of Judah sat before me, that the hand of the lord Jehovah fell there upon me.
Ezek. Then I beheld, , lo, a likeness as the appearance of fire, from the appearance of his loins and downward, fire,  from his loins and upward, as the appearance of brightness, as it were glowing metal.
Ezek. And he put forth the form of a hand,  took me by a lock of my head. And the Spirit lifted me up between earth and heaven,  brought me in the visions of God to Jerusalem, to the door of the gate of the inner court that looks toward the north, where the seat of the image of jealousy was, which provokes to jealousy.
Ezek. And, behold, the glory of the God of Israel was there, according to the appearance that I saw in the plain.
Ezek. Then he said to me, Son of man, lift up thine eyes now the way toward the north. So I lifted up my eyes the way toward the north, , behold, northward of the gate of the altar was this image of jealousy in the entry.
Ezek. And he said to me, Son of man, see thou what they do, even the great abominations that the house of Israel commit here, that I should go far off from my sanctuary? But thou shall again see yet other great abominations.
Ezek. And he brought me to the door of the court. And when I looked, behold, a hole in the wall.
Ezek. Then he said to me, Son of man, dig now in the wall. And when I had dug in the wall, behold, a door.
Ezek. And he said to me, Go in,  see the wicked abominations that they do here.
Ezek. So I went in and saw, , behold, every form of creeping things,  abominable beasts,  all the idols of the house of Israel, portrayed upon the wall round about.
Ezek. And there stood before them seventy men of the elders of the house of Israel. And in the midst of them stood Jaazaniah the son of Shaphan, each man with his censer in his hand,  the odor of the cloud of incense went up.
Ezek. Then he said to me, Son of man, have thou seen what the elders of the house of Israel do in the dark, each man in his chambers of imagery? For they say, Jehovah does not see us. Jehovah has forsaken the land.
Ezek. He also said to me, Thou shall again see yet other great abominations which they do.
Ezek. Then he brought me to the door of the gate of Jehovah's house which was toward the north. And, behold, there sat the women weeping for Tammuz.
Ezek. Then he said to me, Have thou seen this, O son of man? Thou shall again see yet greater abominations than these.
Ezek. And he brought me into the inner court of Jehovah's house. And, behold, at the door of the temple of Jehovah, between the porch and the altar, were about twenty-five men with their backs toward the temple of Jehovah,  their faces toward the east,  they were worshiping the sun toward the east.
Ezek. Then he said to me, Have thou seen this, O son of man? Is it a light thing to the house of Judah that they commit the abominations which they commit here? For they have filled the land with violence,  have turned again to provoke me to anger. And, lo, they put the branch to their nose.
Ezek. Therefore I will also deal in wrath. My eye shall not spare, nor will I have pity. And though they cry in my ears with a loud voice, yet I will not hear them.
Ezek. Then he cried in my ears with a loud voice, saying, Cause ye those who have charge over the city to draw near, each man with his destroying weapon in his hand.
Ezek. And, behold, six men came from the way of the upper gate, which lies toward the north, each man with his slaughter weapon in his hand,  one man in the midst of them clothed in linen, with a writer's case by his side. And they went in,  stood beside the brazen altar.
Ezek. And the glory of the God of Israel went up from the cherub, upon which it was, to the threshold of the house,  he called to the man clothed in linen who had the writer's case by his side.
Ezek. And Jehovah said to him, Go through the midst of the city, through the midst of Jerusalem,  set a mark upon the foreheads of the men who sigh and who cry over all the abominations that are done in the midst of it.
Ezek. And to the others he said in my hearing, Go ye through the city after him,  smite. Let not your eye spare, nor have ye pity.
Ezek. Kill utterly the old man, the young man,  the virgin,  little sons,  women,  come not near any man upon whom is the mark. And begin at my sanctuary. Then they began at the old men who were before the house.
Ezek. And he said to them, Defile the house,  fill the courts with the slain. Go ye forth. And they went forth,  smote in the city.
Ezek. And it came to pass, while they were smiting,  I was left, that I fell upon my face,  cried,  said, Ah lord Jehovah! Will thou destroy all the residue of Israel in thy pouring out of thy wrath upon Jerusalem?
Ezek. Then he said to me, The iniquity of the house of Israel and Judah is exceedingly great,  the land is full of blood,  the city full of perverseness. For they say, Jehovah has forsaken the land,  Jehovah does not see.
Ezek. And as for me also, my eye shall not spare, nor will I have pity,  I will bring their way upon their head.
Ezek. And, behold, the man clothed in linen, who had the writing case by his side, reported the matter, saying, I have done as thou have commanded me.
Ezek. Then I looked, , behold, in the firmament that was over the head of the cherubim there appeared above them as it were a sapphire stone, as the appearance of the likeness of a throne.
Ezek. And he spoke to the man clothed in linen,  said, Go in between the whirling wheels, even under the cherub,  fill both thy hands with coals of fire from between the cherubim,  scatter them over the city. And he went in in my sight.
Ezek. Now the cherubim stood on the right side of the house when the man went in,  the cloud filled the inner court.
Ezek. And the glory of Jehovah mounted up from the cherub, over the threshold of the house. And the house was filled with the cloud,  the court was full of the brightness of Jehovah's glory.
Ezek. And the sound of the wings of the cherubim was heard even to the outer court, as the voice of God Almighty when he speaks.
Ezek. And it came to pass, when he commanded the man clothed in linen, saying, Take fire from between the whirling wheels, from between the cherubim, that he went in,  stood beside a wheel.
Ezek. And the cherub stretched forth his hand from between the cherubim to the fire that was between the cherubim,  took,  put it into the hands of him who was clothed in linen, who took it and went out.
Ezek. And there appeared in the cherubim the form of a man's hand under their wings.
Ezek. And I looked, , behold, four wheels beside the cherubim, one wheel beside one cherub,  another wheel beside another cherub. And the appearance of the wheels was like a beryl stone.
Ezek. And as for their appearance, those four had one likeness, as if a wheel have been within a wheel.
Ezek. When they went, they went in their four directions. They did not turn as they went,  to the place where the head looked they followed it. They did not turn as they went.
Ezek. And their whole body,  their backs,  their hands,  their wings,  the wheels, were full of eyes round about, even the wheels that those four had.
Ezek. As for the wheels, they were called in my hearing, O wheel.
Ezek. And each one had four faces. The first face was the face of the cherub,  the second face was the face of a man,  the third face the face of a lion,  the fourth the face of an eagle.
Ezek. And the cherubim mounted up. This is the living creature that I saw by the river Chebar.
Ezek. And when the cherubim went, the wheels went beside them. And when the cherubim lifted up their wings to mount up from the earth, the wheels also did not turn from beside them.
Ezek. When they stood, these stood,  when they mounted up, these mounted up with them, for the spirit of the living creature was in them.
Ezek. And the glory of Jehovah went forth from over the threshold of the house,  stood over the cherubim.
Ezek. And the cherubim lifted up their wings,  mounted up from the earth in my sight when they went forth,  the wheels beside them. And they stood at the door of the east gate of Jehovah's house,  the glory of the God of Israel was over them above.
Ezek. This is the living creature that I saw under the God of Israel by the river Chebar,  I knew that they were cherubim.
Ezek. Each one had four faces,  each one four wings. And the likeness of the hands of a man was under their wings.
Ezek. And as for the likeness of their faces, they were the faces which I saw by the river Chebar, their appearances and themselves. They went each one straight forward.
Ezek. Moreover the Spirit lifted me up,  brought me to the east gate of Jehovah's house, which looks eastward. And, behold, at the door of the gate twenty-five men. And I saw in the midst of them Jaazaniah the son of Azzur,  Pelatiah the son of Benaiah, rulers of the people.
Ezek. And he said to me, Son of man, these are the men who devise iniquity,  who give wicked counsel in this city,
Ezek. who say, The time is not near to build houses. This city is the caldron,  we are the flesh.
Ezek. Therefore prophesy against them. Prophesy, O son of man.
Ezek. And the Spirit of Jehovah fell upon me,  he said to me, Speak, Thus says Jehovah: Thus ye have said, O house of Israel, for I know the things that come into your mind.
Ezek. Ye have multiplied your slain in this city,  ye have filled the streets thereof with the slain.
Ezek. Therefore thus says the lord Jehovah: Your slain whom ye have laid in the midst of it, they are the flesh,  this city is the caldron,  ye shall be brought forth out of the midst of it.
Ezek. Ye have feared the sword,  I will bring the sword upon you, says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. And I will bring you forth out of the midst of it,  deliver you into the hands of strangers,  will execute judgments among you.
Ezek. Ye shall fall by the sword. I will judge you in the border of Israel,  ye shall know that I am Jehovah.
Ezek. This city shall not be your caldron, nor shall ye be the flesh in the midst thereof. I will judge you in the border of Israel,
Ezek. and ye shall know that I am Jehovah. For ye have not walked in my statutes, nor have ye executed my ordinances,  have done according to the ordinances of the nations that are round about you.
Ezek. And it came to pass, when I prophesied, that Pelatiah the son of Benaiah died. Then I fell down upon my face,  cried with a loud voice,  said, Ah lord Jehovah! Will thou make a full end of the remnant of Israel?
Ezek. And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Ezek. Son of man, thy brothers, even thy brothers, the men of thy kindred,  all the house of Israel, all of them, are those to whom the inhabitants of Jerusalem have said, Get you far from Jehovah. This land is given to us for a possession.
Ezek. Therefore say, Thus says the lord Jehovah: Whereas I have removed them far off among the nations,  whereas I have scattered them among the countries, yet I will be to them a sanctuary for a little while in the countries where they have come.
Ezek. Therefore say, Thus says the lord Jehovah. I will gather you from the peoples,  assemble you out of the countries where ye have been scattered,  I will give you the land of Israel.
Ezek. And they shall come there,  they shall take away from there all the detestable things of it and all the abominations of it.
Ezek. And I will give them one heart,  I will put a new spirit within you. And I will take the stony heart out of their flesh,  will give them a heart of flesh,
Ezek. that they may walk in my statutes,  keep my ordinances,  do them. And they shall be my people,  I will be their God.
Ezek. But as for those whose heart walks according to the heart of their detestable things and their abominations, I will bring their way upon their own heads, says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. Then the cherubim lifted up their wings,  the wheels were beside them,  the glory of the God of Israel was over them above.
Ezek. And the glory of Jehovah went up from the midst of the city,  stood upon the mountain which is on the east side of the city.
Ezek. And the Spirit lifted me up,  brought me in the vision by the Spirit of God into Chaldea, to those of the captivity. So the vision that I had seen went up from me.
Ezek. Then I spoke to those of the captivity all the things that Jehovah had shown me.
Ezek. The word of Jehovah also came to me, saying,
Ezek. Son of man, thou dwell in the midst of the rebellious house, that have eyes to see,  see not, that have ears to hear,  hear not, for they are a rebellious house.
Ezek. Therefore, thou son of man, prepare thee stuff for moving,  move by day in their sight. And thou shall move from thy place to another place in their sight. It may be they will consider, though they are a rebellious house.
Ezek. And thou shall bring forth thy stuff by day in their sight, as stuff for moving. And thou shall go forth thyself at evening in their sight, as when men go forth into exile.
Ezek. Dig thou through the wall in their sight,  carry out by that.
Ezek. Thou shall bear it upon thy shoulder in their sight,  carry it forth in the dark. Thou shall cover thy face, that thou not see the land. For I have set thee for a sign to the house of Israel.
Ezek. And I did so as I was commanded. I brought forth my stuff by day, as stuff for moving,  in the evening I dug through the wall with my hand. I brought it forth in the dark,  bore it upon my shoulder in their sight.
Ezek. And in the morning the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Ezek. Son of man, has not the house of Israel, the rebellious house, said to thee, What are thou doing?
Ezek. Say thou to them, Thus says the lord Jehovah: This burden concerns the ruler in Jerusalem,  all the house of Israel among whom they are.
Ezek. Say, I am your sign. Just as I have done, so shall it be done to them. They shall go into exile, into captivity.
Ezek. And the ruler who is among them shall bear upon his shoulder in the dark,  shall go forth. They shall dig through the wall to carry out by it. He shall cover his face, because he shall not see the land with his eyes.
Ezek. I will also spread my net upon him,  he shall be taken in my snare. And I will bring him to Babylon to the land of the Chaldeans, yet he shall not see it, though he shall die there.
Ezek. And I will scatter toward every wind all who are round about him to help him,  all his groups. And I will draw out the sword after them.
Ezek. And they shall know that I am Jehovah, when I shall disperse them among the nations,  scatter them through the countries.
Ezek. But I will leave a few men of them from the sword, from the famine,  from the pestilence, that they may declare all their abominations among the nations where they come. And they shall know that I am Jehovah.
Ezek. Moreover the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Ezek. Son of man, eat thy bread with quaking,  drink thy water with trembling and with fearfulness.
Ezek. And say to the people of the land, Thus says the lord Jehovah concerning the inhabitants of Jerusalem,  the land of Israel: They shall eat their bread with fearfulness,  drink their water in dismay, that her land may be desolate of all that is in it, because of the violence of all those who dwell therein.
Ezek. And the cities that are inhabited shall be laid waste,  the land shall be a desolation. And ye shall know that I am Jehovah.
Ezek. And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Ezek. Son of man, what is this proverb that ye have in the land of Israel, saying, The days are prolonged,  every vision fails?
Ezek. Tell them therefore, Thus says the lord Jehovah: I will make this proverb to cease,  they shall no more use it as a proverb in Israel,  say to them, The days are at hand,  the fulfillment of every vision.
Ezek. For there shall no more be any false vision nor flattering divination within the house of Israel.
Ezek. For I am Jehovah. I will speak,  the word that I shall speak shall be performed. It shall be no more deferred. For in your days, O rebellious house, I will speak the word,  will perform it, says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. Again the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Ezek. Son of man, behold, those of the house of Israel say, The vision that he sees is for many day to come,  he prophesies of times that are far off.
Ezek. Therefore say to them, Thus says the lord Jehovah: There shall none of my words be deferred any more,  the word which I shall speak shall be performed, says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Ezek. Son of man, prophesy against the prophets of Israel who prophesy,  say thou to those who prophesy out of their own heart, Hear ye the word of Jehovah.
Ezek. Thus says the lord Jehovah: Woe to the foolish prophets, who follow their own spirit,  have seen nothing!
Ezek. O Israel, thy prophets have been like foxes in the waste places.
Ezek. Ye have not gone up into the gaps, nor built up the wall for the house of Israel to stand in the battle in the day of Jehovah.
Ezek. They have seen falsehood and lying divination, who say, Jehovah says,  Jehovah has not sent them. And they have made men to hope that the word would be confirmed.
Ezek. Have ye not seen a false vision,  have ye not spoken a lying divination, in that ye say, Jehovah says, albeit I have not spoken?
Ezek. Therefore thus says the lord Jehovah: Because ye have spoken falsehood,  seen lies, therefore, behold, I am against you, says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. And my hand shall be against the prophets who see false visions,  who divine lies. They shall not be in the council of my people, nor shall they be written in the writing of the house of Israel, neither shall they enter into the land of Israel. And ye shall know that I am the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. Because, even because they have seduced my people, saying, Peace,  there is no peace,  when a man builds up a wall, behold, they daub it with untempered mortar,
Ezek. say to those who daub it with untempered mortar, that it shall fall. There shall be an overflowing shower,  ye, O great hailstones, shall fall,  a stormy wind shall rend it.
Ezek. Lo, when the wall has fallen, shall it not be said to you, Where is the daubing with which ye have daubed it?
Ezek. Therefore thus says the lord Jehovah: I will even rend it with a stormy wind in my wrath,  there shall be an overflowing shower in my anger,  great hailstones in wrath to consume it.
Ezek. So I will break down the wall that ye have daubed with untempered mortar,  bring it down to the ground, so that the foundation thereof shall be uncovered. And it shall fall,  ye shall be consumed in the midst of it. And ye shall know that I am Jehovah.
Ezek. Thus I will accomplish my wrath upon the wall,  upon those who have daubed it with untempered mortar. And I will say to you, The wall is no more, nor those who daubed it,
Ezek. namely, the prophets of Israel who prophesy concerning Jerusalem,  who see visions of peace for her,  there is no peace, says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. And thou, son of man, set thy face against the daughters of thy people, who prophesy out of their own heart,  prophesy thou against them.
Ezek. And say, Thus says the lord Jehovah: Woe to the women who sew pillows upon all elbows,  make headdresses for the head of every stature to hunt souls! Will ye hunt the souls of my people,  save souls alive for yourselves?
Ezek. And ye have profaned me among my people for handfuls of barley and for pieces of bread, to kill the souls who should not die,  to save the souls alive who should not live, by your lying to my people who listen to lies.
Ezek. Therefore thus says the lord Jehovah: Behold, I am against your pillows, with which ye hunt the souls there to make fly,  I will tear them from your arms. And I will let the souls go, even the souls that ye hunt to make fly.
Ezek. I will also tear your headdresses,  deliver my people out of your hand,  they shall no more be in your hand to be hunted. And ye shall know that I am Jehovah.
Ezek. Because with lies ye have grieved the heart of the righteous, whom I have not made sad,  strengthened the hands of the wicked, that he should not return from his wicked way,  be saved alive.
Ezek. Therefore ye shall no more see false visions, nor divine divinations. And I will deliver my people out of your hand. And ye shall know that I am Jehovah.
Ezek. Then certain of the elders of Israel came to me,  sat before me.
Ezek. And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Ezek. Son of man, these men have taken their idols into their heart,  put the stumbling block of their iniquity before their face. Should I be inquired of at all by them?
Ezek. Therefore speak to them,  say to them, Thus says the lord Jehovah: Every man of the house of Israel who takes his idols into his heart,  puts the stumbling block of his iniquity before his face,  comes to the prophet, I Jehovah will answer him in it according to the multitude of his idols,
Ezek. that I may take the house of Israel in their own heart, because they are all estranged from me through their idols.
Ezek. Therefore say to the house of Israel, Thus says the lord Jehovah: Return ye,  turn yourselves from your idols,  turn away your faces from all your abominations.
Ezek. For everyone of the house of Israel, or of the strangers who sojourn in Israel, that separates himself from me,  takes his idols into his heart,  puts the stumbling block of his iniquity before his face,  comes to the prophet to inquire for himself of me, I Jehovah will answer him by myself.
Ezek. And I will set my face against that man,  will make him an astonishment, for a sign and a proverb. And I will cut him off from the midst of my people. And ye shall know that I am Jehovah.
Ezek. And if the prophet is deceived and speaks a word, I, Jehovah, have deceived that prophet. And I will stretch out my hand upon him,  will destroy him from the midst of my people Israel.
Ezek. And they shall bear their iniquity. The iniquity of the prophet shall be even as the iniquity of him who seeks him,
Ezek. that the house of Israel may no more go astray from me, nor defile themselves any more with all their transgressions,  that they may be my people,  I may be their God, says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Ezek. Son of man, when a land sins against me by committing a trespass,  I stretch out my hand upon it,  break the staff of the bread thereof,  send famine upon it,  cut off from it man and beast,
Ezek. though these three men, Noah, Daniel,  Job, were in it, they would deliver but their own souls by their righteousness, says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. If I cause evil beasts to pass through the land,  they ravage it,  it be made desolate, so that no man may pass through because of the beasts,
Ezek. though these three men were in it, as I live, says the lord Jehovah, they would deliver neither sons nor daughters, they only would be delivered,  the land would be desolate.
Ezek. Or if I bring a sword upon that land,  say, Sword, go through the land, so that I cut off from it man and beast,
Ezek. though these three men were in it, as I live, says the lord Jehovah, they would deliver neither sons nor daughters,  they only would be delivered themselves.
Ezek. Or if I send a pestilence into that land,  pour out my wrath upon it in blood, to cut off from it man and beast,
Ezek. though Noah, Daniel,  Job, were in it, as I live, says the lord Jehovah, they would deliver neither son nor daughter, they would but deliver their own souls by their righteousness.
Ezek. For thus says the lord Jehovah: How much more when I send my four severe judgments upon Jerusalem, the sword,  the famine,  the evil beasts,  the pestilence, to cut off from it man and beast!
Ezek. Yet, behold, there shall be left a remnant in it that shall be carried forth, both sons and daughters. Behold, they shall come forth to you,  ye shall see their way and their doings. And ye shall be comforted concerning the evil that I have brought upon Jerusalem, even concerning all that I have brought upon it.
Ezek. And they shall comfort you when ye see their way and their doings. And ye shall know that I have not done all that I have done in it without cause, says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Ezek. Son of man, what is the vine tree more than any tree, the vine branch which is among the trees of the forest?
Ezek. Shall wood be taken of it to make any work? Or will men take a pin of it to hang any vessel thereon?
Ezek. Behold, it is cast into the fire for fuel. The fire has devoured both the ends of it,  the midst of it is burned. Is it profitable for any work?
Ezek. Behold, when it was whole, it was fit for no work. How much less, when the fire has devoured it,  it is burned, shall it yet be fit for any work!
Ezek. Therefore thus says the lord Jehovah: As the vine tree among the trees of the forest, which I have given to the fire for fuel, so I will give the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
Ezek. And I will set my face against them. They shall go forth from the fire,  the fire shall devour them. And ye shall know that I am Jehovah when I set my face against them.
Ezek. And I will make the land desolate because they have committed a trespass, says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. Again the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Ezek. Son of man, cause Jerusalem to know her abominations,
Ezek. and say, Thus says the lord Jehovah to Jerusalem: Thy birth and thy nativity is from the land of the Canaanite. The Amorite was thy father,  thy mother was a Hittite.
Ezek. And as for thy nativity, in the day thou were born thy navel was not cut, nor were thou washed in water to cleanse thee. Thou were not salted at all, nor swaddled at all.
Ezek. No eye pitied thee, to do any of these things to thee, to have compassion upon thee,  thou were cast out in the open field. For thy person was abhorred, in the day that thou were born.
Ezek. And when I passed by thee,  saw thee weltering in thy blood, I said to thee, in thy blood, Live! Yea, I said to thee, in thy blood, Live!
Ezek. I caused thee to multiply as that which grows in the field,  thou increased and grew great. And thou attained to excellent ornament, thy breasts were fashioned,  thy hair was grown. Yet thou were naked and bare.
Ezek. Now when I passed by thee,  looked upon thee, behold, thy time was the time of love. And I spread my skirt over thee,  covered thy nakedness. Yea, I swore to thee,  entered into a covenant with thee, says the lord Jehovah,  thou became mine.
Ezek. Then I washed thee with water. Yea, I thoroughly washed away thy blood from thee,  I anointed thee with oil.
Ezek. I also clothed thee with embroidered work,  shod thee with a certain skin. And I girded thee around with fine linen,  covered thee with silk.
Ezek. And I decked thee with ornaments,  I put bracelets upon thy hands,  a chain on thy neck.
Ezek. And I put a ring upon thy nose,  earrings in thine ears,  a beautiful crown upon thy head.
Ezek. Thus thou were decked with gold and silver,  thy raiment was of fine linen,  silk,  embroidered work. Thou ate fine flour,  honey,  oil. And thou were very beautiful,  thou prospered to royalty.
Ezek. And thy renown went forth among the nations for thy beauty. For it was perfect, through my majesty which I had put upon thee, says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. But thou trusted in thy beauty,  played the harlot because of thy renown,  poured out thy whoredoms on everyone who passed by; his it was.
Ezek. And thou took of thy garments,  made high places for thee, decked with various colors,  played the harlot upon them, things which should not come, nor should it be.
Ezek. Thou also took thy fair jewels of my gold and of my silver, which I had given thee,  made for thee images of men,  played the harlot with them.
Ezek. And thou took thy embroidered garments,  covered them,  set my oil and my incense before them.
Ezek. My bread also which I gave thee, fine flour and oil and honey, with which I fed thee, thou even set it before them for a sweet savor,  thus it was, says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. Moreover thou have taken thy sons and thy daughters, whom thou have borne to me,  thou have sacrificed these to them to be devoured. Were thy whoredoms a small matter,
Ezek. that thou have slain my children,  delivered them up, in causing them to pass through the fire to them?
Ezek. And in all thine abominations and thy whoredoms thou have not remembered the days of thy youth when thou were naked and bare,  were weltering in thy blood.
Ezek. And it has come to pass according to all thy wickedness, (woe, woe to thee! says the lord Jehovah),
Ezek. that thou have built thyself a vaulted place,  have made thee a lofty place in every street.
Ezek. Thou have built thy lofty place at the head of every way,  have made thy beauty an abomination. And have opened thy feet to everyone who passed by,  multiplied thy whoredom.
Ezek. Thou have also committed fornication with the Egyptians, thy neighbors, great of flesh,  have multiplied thy whoredom, to provoke me to anger.
Ezek. Behold therefore, I have stretched out my hand over thee,  have diminished thy portion,  delivered thee to the will of those who hate thee, the daughters of the Philistines, who are ashamed of thy lewd way.
Ezek. Thou have played the harlot also with the Assyrians, because thou were insatiable. Yea, thou have played the harlot with them,  yet thou were not satisfied.
Ezek. Thou have moreover multiplied thy whoredom to the land of traffic, to Chaldea,  yet thou were not satisfied with this.
Ezek. How weak is thy heart, says the lord Jehovah, seeing thou do all these things, the work of an impudent harlot,
Ezek. in that thou build thy vaulted place at the head of every way,  make thy lofty place in every street. And have not even been as a harlot, in that thou scorn hire.
Ezek. A wife who commits adultery, who takes strangers instead of her husband!
Ezek. They give gifts to all harlots,  thou give thy gifts to all thy lovers,  bribe them, that they may come to thee on every side for thy whoredoms.
Ezek. And thou are different from other women in thy whoredoms, in that none follows thee to play the harlot. And whereas thou give a wage,  no wage is given to thee, therefore thou are different.
Ezek. Therefore, O harlot, hear the word of Jehovah.
Ezek. Thus says the lord Jehovah: Because thy filthiness was poured out,  thy nakedness uncovered through thy whoredoms with thy lovers,  because of all the idols of thy abominations,  for the blood of thy sons, that thou gave to them,
Ezek. therefore, behold, I will gather all thy lovers, with whom thou have taken pleasure,  all those whom thou have loved, with all those whom thou have hated, I will even gather them against thee on every side. And I will uncover thy nakedness to them, that they may see all thy nakedness.
Ezek. And I will judge thee, as women who break wedlock and shed blood are judged. And I will bring upon thee the blood of wrath and jealousy.
Ezek. I will also give thee into their hand,  they shall throw down thy vaulted place,  break down thy lofty places. And they shall strip thee of thy clothes,  take thy fair jewels,  they shall leave thee naked and bare.
Ezek. They shall also bring up a company against thee,  they shall stone thee with stones,  thrust thee through with their swords.
Ezek. And they shall burn thy houses with fire,  execute judgments upon thee in the sight of many women. And I will cause thee to cease from playing the harlot,  thou shall also give no wage any more.
Ezek. So I will cause my wrath toward thee to rest,  my jealousy shall depart from thee,  I will be quiet,  will no more be angry.
Ezek. Because thou have not remembered the days of thy youth,  have raged against me in all these things, therefore, behold, I also will bring thy way upon thy head, says the lord Jehovah. And thou shall not commit this lewdness with all thine abominations.
Ezek. Behold, everyone who uses proverbs shall use this proverb against thee, saying, As is the mother, so is her daughter.
Ezek. Thou are the daughter of thy mother, who loathes her husband and her sons. And thou are the sister of thy sisters, who loathed their husbands and their sons. Your mother was a Hittite,  your father an Amorite.
Ezek. And thine elder sister is Samaria, who dwells at thy left hand, she and her daughters. And thy younger sister, who dwells at thy right hand, is Sodom and her daughters.
Ezek. Yet thou have not walked in their ways, nor done according to their abominations, , like it was a very little thing, thou were more corrupt than they in all thy ways.
Ezek. As I live, says the lord Jehovah, Sodom thy sister has not done, she nor her daughters, as thou have done, thou and thy daughters.
Ezek. Behold, this was the iniquity of thy sister Sodom: pride, fullness of bread,  prosperous ease was in her and in her daughters,  she did not strengthen the hand of a poor and needy man.
Ezek. And they were haughty,  committed abomination before me. Therefore I took them away as I saw fit.
Ezek. Neither has Samaria committed half of thy sins,  thou have multiplied thine abominations more than they,  have justified thy sisters by all thine abominations which thou have done.
Ezek. Thou also, bear thou thine own shame, in that thou have given judgment for thy sisters, through thy sins that thou have committed more abominable than they. They are more righteous than thou. Yea, be thou also confounded,  bear thy shame, in that thou have justified thy sisters.
Ezek. And I will turn back again their captivity, the captivity of Sodom and her daughters,  the captivity of Samaria and her daughters,  the captivity of thy captives in the midst of them,
Ezek. that thou may bear thine own shame,  may be ashamed because of all that thou have done, in that thou are a comfort to them.
Ezek. And thy sisters, Sodom and her daughters, shall return to their former estate,  Samaria and her daughters shall return to their former estate,  thou and thy daughters shall return to your former estate.
Ezek. For thy sister Sodom was not mentioned by thy mouth in the day of thy pride,
Ezek. before thy wickedness was uncovered, as at the time of the reproach of the daughters of Syria,  of all who are round about her, the daughters of the Philistines, who do despite to thee round about.
Ezek. Thou have borne thy lewdness and thine abominations, says Jehovah.
Ezek. For thus says the lord Jehovah: I will also deal with thee as thou have done, who have despised the oath in breaking the covenant.
Ezek. Nevertheless I will remember my covenant with thee in the days of thy youth,  I will establish to thee an everlasting covenant.
Ezek. Then thou shall remember thy ways,  be ashamed, when thou shall receive thy sisters, thine elder sisters and thy younger,  I will give them to thee for daughters,  not by thy covenant.
Ezek. And I will establish my covenant with thee,  thou shall know that I am Jehovah,
Ezek. that thou may remember,  be confounded,  never open thy mouth any more, because of thy shame, when I have forgiven thee all that thou have done, says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Ezek. Son of man, put forth a riddle,  speak a parable to the house of Israel,
Ezek. and say, Thus says the lord Jehovah: A great eagle with great wings and long pinions, full of feathers, which had various colors, came to Lebanon,  took the top of the cedar.
Ezek. He cropped off the topmost of the young twigs of it,  carried it to a land of merchandise. He set it in a city of merchants.
Ezek. He took also of the seed of the land,  planted it in a fruitful soil. He placed it beside many waters. He set it as a willow tree.
Ezek. And it grew,  became a spreading vine of low stature, whose branches turned toward him,  the roots of it were under him. So it became a vine,  brought forth branches,  shot forth sprigs.
Ezek. There was also another great eagle with great wings and many feathers. And, behold, this vine bent its roots toward him,  shot forth its branches toward him, from the beds of its plantation, that he might water it.
Ezek. It was planted in a good soil by many waters that it might bring forth branches,  that it might bear fruit that it might be a goodly vine.
Ezek. Say thou, Thus says the lord Jehovah: Shall it flourish? Shall he not pull up the roots of it,  cut off the fruit of it, that it may wither? It shall wither in all its fresh springing leaves, even without great power or many people to pluck it up by the roots of it.
Ezek. Yea, behold, being planted, shall it flourish? Shall it not utterly wither when the east wind touches it? It shall wither in the beds where it grew.
Ezek. Moreover the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Ezek. Say now to the rebellious house, Know ye not what these things mean? Tell them, Behold, the king of Babylon came to Jerusalem,  took the king of it,  the rulers of it,  brought them to him to Babylon.
Ezek. And he took of the seed royal,  made a covenant with him. He also brought him under an oath,  took away the mighty of the land,
Ezek. that the kingdom might be base, that it might not lift itself up,  that by keeping his covenant it might stand.
Ezek. But he rebelled against him in sending his ambassadors into Egypt that they might give him horses and many people. Shall he prosper? Shall he escape who does such things? Shall he break the covenant,  yet escape?
Ezek. As I live, says the lord Jehovah, surely in the place where the king dwells who made him king, whose oath he despised,  whose covenant he broke, even with him in the midst of Babylon he shall die.
Ezek. Nor shall Pharaoh with his mighty army and great company help him in the war when they cast up mounds and build forts to cut off many persons.
Ezek. For he has despised the oath by breaking the covenant. And, behold, he had given his hand,  yet has done all these things. He shall not escape.
Ezek. Therefore thus says the lord Jehovah: As I live, surely my oath that he has despised,  my covenant that he has broken, I will even bring it upon his own head.
Ezek. And I will spread my net upon him,  he shall be taken in my snare. And I will bring him to Babylon,  will enter into judgment with him there for his trespass that he has trespassed against me.
Ezek. And all his fugitives in all his groups shall fall by the sword,  those who remain shall be scattered toward every wind. And ye shall know that I, Jehovah, have spoken it.
Ezek. Thus says the lord Jehovah: I will also take of the lofty top of the cedar,  will set it. I will crop off a tender one from the topmost of its young twigs,  I will plant it upon a high and lofty mountain.
Ezek. I will plant it in the mountain of the height of Israel,  it shall bring forth boughs,  bear fruit,  be a goodly cedar. And all birds of every wing shall dwell under it; they shall dwell in the shade of the branches thereof.
Ezek. And all the trees of the field shall know that I, Jehovah, have brought down the high tree, have exalted the low tree, have dried up the green tree,  have made the dry tree to flourish. I, Jehovah, have spoken and have done it.
Ezek. The word of Jehovah came to me again, saying,
Ezek. What do ye mean, that ye use this proverb concerning the land of Israel, saying, The fathers have eaten sour grapes,  the son's teeth are set on edge?
Ezek. As I live, says the lord Jehovah, ye shall not have occasion any more to use this proverb in Israel.
Ezek. Behold, all souls are mine, as the soul of the father, so also the soul of the son is mine. The soul that sins, it shall die.
Ezek. But if a man be just,  does that which is lawful and right,
Ezek. and has not eaten upon the mountains, nor has lifted up his eyes to the idols of the house of Israel, nor has defiled his neighbor's wife, nor has come near to a woman in her impurity,
Ezek. and has not wronged any man,  has restored to the debtor his pledge, has taken nothing by robbery, has given his bread to a hungry man,  has covered a naked man with a garment,
Ezek. he who has not given forth upon interest, nor has taken any increase, who has withdrawn his hand from iniquity, has executed true justice between man and man,
Ezek. has walked in my statutes,  has kept my ordinances, to deal truly, he is just. He shall surely live, says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. If he begets a son who is a robber, a shedder of blood,  who does any one of these things,
Ezek. and who does not do any of those duties,  has even eaten upon the mountains,  defiled his neighbor's wife,
Ezek. has wronged the poor and needy man, has taken by robbery, has not restored the pledge,  has lifted up his eyes to the idols, has committed abomination,
Ezek. has given forth upon interest,  has taken increase, shall he then live? He shall not live. He has done all these abominations. He shall surely die. His blood shall be upon him.
Ezek. Now, lo, if he begets a son, who sees all his father's sins, which he has done,  fears,  does not do such like,
Ezek. who has not eaten upon the mountains, nor has lifted up his eyes to the idols of the house of Israel, has not defiled his neighbor's wife,
Ezek. nor has wronged any man, has not taken anything to pledge, nor has taken by robbery,  has given his bread to a hungry man,  has covered a naked man with a garment,
Ezek. who has withdrawn his hand from a poor man, who has not received interest nor increase, has executed my ordinances, has walked in my statutes, he shall not die for the iniquity of his father. He shall surely live.
Ezek. As for his father, because he cruelly oppressed, robbed his brother,  did that which is not good among his people, behold, he shall die in his iniquity.
Ezek. Yet ye say, Why does not the son bear the iniquity of the father? When the son has done that which is lawful and right,  has kept all my statutes,  has done them, he shall surely live.
Ezek. The soul that sins, it shall die. The son shall not bear the iniquity of the father, nor shall the father bear the iniquity of the son. The righteousness of a righteous man shall be upon him,  the wickedness of a wicked man shall be upon him.
Ezek. But if a wicked man turns from all his sins that he has committed,  keeps all my statutes,  does that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live. He shall not die.
Ezek. None of his transgressions that he has committed shall be remembered against him. In his righteousness that he has done he shall live.
Ezek. Have I any pleasure in the death of a wicked man? says the lord Jehovah,  not rather that he should return from his way,  live?
Ezek. But when a righteous man turns away from his righteousness,  commits iniquity,  does according to all the abominations that a wicked man does, shall he live? None of his righteous deeds that he has done shall be remembered. In his trespass that he has trespassed,  in his sin that he has sinned, in them he shall die.
Ezek. Yet ye say, The way of the Lord is not equitable. Hear now, O house of Israel. Is not my way equitable? Are not your ways inequitable?
Ezek. When a righteous man turns away from his righteousness,  commits iniquity,  dies in it, in his iniquity that he has done, he shall die.
Ezek. Again, when a wicked man turns away from his wickedness that he has committed,  does that which is lawful and right, he shall save his soul alive.
Ezek. Because he considers,  turns away from all his transgressions that he has committed, he shall surely live. He shall not die.
Ezek. Yet the house of Israel says, The way of the Lord is not equitable. O house of Israel, are not my ways equitable? Are not your ways inequitable?
Ezek. Therefore I will judge you, O house of Israel, each one according to his ways, says the lord Jehovah. Return ye,  turn yourselves from all your transgressions, so iniquity shall not be your ruin.
Ezek. Cast away from you all your transgressions, by which ye have transgressed,  make you a new heart and a new spirit. For why will ye die, O house of Israel?
Ezek. For I have no pleasure in the death of him who dies, says the lord Jehovah, therefore turn yourselves back,  live.
Ezek. Moreover, take thou up a lamentation for the rulers of Israel,
Ezek. and say, What was thy mother? A lioness. She couched among lions. In the midst of the young lions she nourished her whelps.
Ezek. And she brought up one of her whelps. He became a young lion,  he learned to catch the prey. He devoured men.
Ezek. The nations also heard of him. He was taken in their pit,  they brought him with hooks to the land of Egypt.
Ezek. Now when she saw that she had waited,  her hope was lost, then she took another of her whelps,  made him a young lion.
Ezek. And he went up and down among the lions. He became a young lion,  he learned to catch the prey. He devoured men.
Ezek. And he knew their palaces,  laid waste their cities. And the land was desolate,  the fullness of it, because of the noise of his roaring.
Ezek. Then the nations set against him on every side from the provinces,  they spread their net over him. He was taken in their pit.
Ezek. And they put him in a cage with hooks,  brought him to the king of Babylon. They brought him into strongholds, that his voice should no more be heard upon the mountains of Israel.
Ezek. Thy mother was like a vine in thy blood, planted by the waters. It was fruitful and full of branches because of many waters.
Ezek. And it had strong twigs for the scepters of those who bore rule. And their stature was exalted among the thick boughs,  they were seen in their height with the multitude of their branches.
Ezek. But it was plucked up in fury. It was cast down to the ground,  the east wind dried up its fruit. Its strong twigs were broken off and withered. The fire consumed them.
Ezek. And now it is planted in the wilderness, in a dry and thirsty land.
Ezek. And fire has gone out of the twigs of its branches. It has devoured its fruit, so that there is no strong twig in it to be a scepter to rule. This is a lamentation,  shall be for a lamentation.
Ezek. And it came to pass in the seventh year, in the fifth month, the tenth day of the month, that certain of the elders of Israel came to inquire of Jehovah,  sat before me.
Ezek. And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Ezek. Son of man, speak to the elders of Israel,  say to them, Thus says the lord Jehovah: Is it to inquire of me that ye have come? As I live, says the lord Jehovah, I will not be inquired of by you.
Ezek. Will thou judge them, son of man, will thou judge them? Cause them to know the abominations of their fathers,
Ezek. and say to them, Thus says the lord Jehovah: In the day when I chose Israel,  swore to the seed of the house of Jacob,  made myself known to them in the land of Egypt, when I swore to them, saying, I am Jehovah your God,
Ezek. I swore to them in that day, to bring them forth out of the land of Egypt into a land that I had searched out for them, flowing with milk and honey, which is the glory of all lands.
Ezek. And I said to them, Cast ye away every man the abominations of his eyes,  do not defile yourselves with the idols of Egypt. I am Jehovah your God.
Ezek. But they rebelled against me,  would not hearken to me. They did not every man cast away the abominations of their eyes, nor did they forsake the idols of Egypt. Then I said I would pour out my wrath upon them, to accomplish my anger against them in the midst of the land of Egypt.
Ezek. But I worked for my name's sake (that it should not be profaned in the sight of the nations, among which they were, in whose sight I made myself known to them) in bringing them forth out of the land of Egypt.
Ezek. So I caused them to go forth out of the land of Egypt,  brought them into the wilderness.
Ezek. And I gave them my statutes,  showed them my ordinances, which if a man does, he shall live in them.
Ezek. Moreover I also gave them my sabbaths, to be a sign between me and them, that they might know that I am Jehovah who sanctifies them.
Ezek. But the house of Israel rebelled against me in the wilderness. They did not walk in my statutes,  they rejected my ordinances, which if a man keeps, he shall live in them. And they greatly profaned my sabbaths. Then I said I would pour out my wrath upon them in the wilderness, to consume them.
Ezek. But I worked for my name's sake, that it should not be profaned in the sight of the nations, in whose sight I brought them out.
Ezek. Moreover also I swore to them in the wilderness, that I would not bring them into the land which I had given them, flowing with milk and honey, which is the glory of all lands,
Ezek. because they rejected my ordinances,  did not walk in my statutes,  profaned my sabbaths, for their heart went after their idols.
Ezek. Nevertheless my eye spared them,  I did not destroy them, nor did I make a full end of them in the wilderness.
Ezek. And I said to their sons in the wilderness, Walk ye not in the statutes of your fathers. Neither observe their ordinances, nor defile yourselves with their idols.
Ezek. I am Jehovah your God. Walk in my statutes,  keep my ordinances,  do them,
Ezek. and hallow my sabbaths,  they shall be a sign between me and you, that ye may know that I am Jehovah your God.
Ezek. But the sons rebelled against me. They did not walk in my statutes, nor kept my ordinances to do them, which if a man does, he shall live in them. They profaned my sabbaths. Then I said I would pour out my wrath upon them, to accomplish my anger against them in the wilderness.
Ezek. Nevertheless I withdrew my hand,  worked for my name's sake, that it should not be profaned in the sight of the nations, in whose sight I brought them forth.
Ezek. Moreover I swore to them in the wilderness, that I would scatter them among the nations,  disperse them through the countries,
Ezek. because they had not executed my ordinances,  had rejected my statutes,  had profaned my sabbaths,  their eyes were after their fathers' idols.
Ezek. Moreover I also gave them statutes that were not good,  ordinances in which they will not live.
Ezek. And I polluted them in their own gifts, in that they caused to pass through the fire all that opens the womb, that I might make them desolate, to the end that they might know that I am Jehovah.
Ezek. Therefore, son of man, speak to the house of Israel,  say to them, Thus says the lord Jehovah: In this moreover your fathers have blasphemed me, in that they have committed a trespass against me.
Ezek. For when I had brought them into the land, which I swore to give to them, then they saw every high hill,  every thick tree,  they offered there their sacrifices,  there they presented the provocation of their offering. There also they made their sweet savor,  they poured out there their drink offerings.
Ezek. Then I said to them, What does the high place to which ye go mean? So the name of it is called Bamah to this day.
Ezek. Therefore say to the house of Israel, Thus says the lord Jehovah: Do ye pollute yourselves according to the manner of your fathers,  play ye the harlot according to their abominations?
Ezek. And when ye offer your gifts, when ye make your sons to pass through the fire, do ye pollute yourselves with all your idols to this day? And shall I be inquired of by you, O house of Israel? As I live, says the lord Jehovah, I will not be inquired of by you.
Ezek. And that which comes into your mind shall not be at all, in that ye say, We will be as the nations, as the families of the countries, to serve wood and stone.
Ezek. As I live, says the lord Jehovah, surely with a mighty hand,  with an outstretched arm,  with wrath poured out, I will be king over you.
Ezek. And I will bring you out from the peoples,  will gather you out of the countries in which ye are scattered, with a mighty hand,  with an outstretched arm,  with wrath poured out,
Ezek. and I will bring you into the wilderness of the peoples. And there I will enter into judgment with you face to face.
Ezek. Just as I entered into judgment with your fathers in the wilderness of the land of Egypt, so I will enter into judgment with you, says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. And I will cause you to pass under the rod. And I will bring you into the bond of the covenant.
Ezek. And I will purge out from among you the rebels,  those who transgress against me. I will bring them forth out of the land where they sojourn,  they shall not enter into the land of Israel. And ye shall know that I am Jehovah.
Ezek. As for you, O house of Israel, thus says the lord Jehovah: Go ye. Serve each one his idols,  hereafter also, if ye will not hearken to me. But ye shall no more profane my holy name with your gifts,  with your idols.
Ezek. For in my holy mountain, in the mountain of the height of Israel, says the lord Jehovah, there shall all the house of Israel, all of them, serve me in the land. There I will accept them,  there I will require your offerings,  the first-fruits of your oblations, with all your holy things.
Ezek. I will accept you as a sweet savor when I bring you out from the peoples,  gather you out of the countries in which ye have been scattered. And I will be sanctified in you in the sight of the nations.
Ezek. And ye shall know that I am Jehovah when I shall bring you into the land of Israel, into the country which I swore to give to your fathers.
Ezek. And there ye shall remember your ways,  all your doings, by which ye have polluted yourselves. And ye shall loathe yourselves in your own sight for all your evils that ye have committed.
Ezek. And ye shall know that I am Jehovah when I have dealt with you for my name's sake, not according to your evil ways, nor according to your corrupt doings, O ye house of Israel, says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Ezek. Son of man, set thy face toward the south,  drop thy word toward the south,  prophesy against the forest of the field in the South.
Ezek. And say to the forest of the South, Hear the word of Jehovah. Thus says the lord Jehovah: Behold, I will kindle a fire in thee,  it shall devour every green tree in thee,  every dry tree. The flaming flame shall not be quenched,  all faces from the south to the north shall be burnt by it.
Ezek. And all flesh shall see that I, Jehovah, have kindled it. It shall not be quenched.
Ezek. Then I said, Ah lord Jehovah! They say of me, Is he not a speaker of parables?
Ezek. And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Ezek. Son of man, set thy face toward Jerusalem,  drop thy word toward the sanctuaries,  prophesy against the land of Israel.
Ezek. And say to the land of Israel, Thus says Jehovah: Behold, I am against thee. And will draw forth my sword out of its sheath,  will cut off from thee the righteous and the wicked.
Ezek. Seeing then that I will cut off from thee the righteous and the wicked, therefore my sword shall go forth out of its sheath against all flesh from the south to the north.
Ezek. And all flesh shall know that I, Jehovah, have drawn forth my sword out of its sheath. It shall not return any more.
Ezek. Sigh therefore, thou son of man. With the breaking of thy loins and with bitterness thou shall sigh before their eyes.
Ezek. And it shall be, when they say to thee, Why do thou sigh? That thou shall say, Because of the news. For it comes,  every heart shall melt,  all hands shall be feeble,  every spirit shall faint,  all knees shall be weak as water. Behold, it comes,  it shall be done, says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Ezek. Son of man, prophesy,  say, Thus says Jehovah: Say, A sword, a sword. It is sharpened,  also furbished.
Ezek. It is sharpened that it may make a slaughter. It is polished that it may be as lightning. Shall we then make mirth? It scorns the scepter of my son, every tree.
Ezek. And it is given to be polished, that it may be handled. The sword, it is sharpened, yea, it is polished, to give it into the hand of the slayer.
Ezek. Cry and wail, son of man, for it is upon my people. It is upon all the rulers of Israel. They are delivered over to the sword with my people. Smite therefore upon thy thigh.
Ezek. For there is a trial,  what if even the rod that scorns shall be no more? says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. Thou therefore, son of man, prophesy,  smite thy hands together. And let the sword be doubled the third time, the sword of the deadly wounded. It is the sword of the great man who is deadly wounded, which enters into their chambers.
Ezek. I have set the threatening sword against all their gates, that their heart may melt,  their stumblings be multiplied. Ah! It is made as lightning. It is pointed for slaughter.
Ezek. Gather thee together. Go to the right. Set thyself in array. Go to the left, wherever thy face is set.
Ezek. I will also smite my hands together,  I will cause my wrath to rest. I, Jehovah, have spoken it.
Ezek. The word of Jehovah came to me again, saying,
Ezek. Also, thou son of man, appoint thee two ways that the sword of the king of Babylon may come. Those two shall come forth out of one land. And mark out a place. Mark it out at the head of the way to the city.
Ezek. Thou shall appoint a way for the sword to come to Rabbah of the sons of Ammon,  to Judah in Jerusalem the fortified.
Ezek. For the king of Babylon stood at the parting of the way, at the head of the two ways, to use divination. He shook the arrows to and fro. He consulted the teraphim. He looked in the liver.
Ezek. In his right hand was the divination for Jerusalem, to set battering rams, to open the mouth in the slaughter, to lift up the voice with shouting, to set battering rams against the gates, to cast up mounds, to build forts.
Ezek. And it shall be to them as a false divination in their sight, who have sworn oaths to them. But he brings iniquity to remembrance, that they may be taken.
Ezek. Therefore thus says the lord Jehovah: Because ye have made your iniquity to be remembered, in that your transgressions are uncovered, so that in all your doings your sins do appear, because ye have come to remembrance, ye shall be taken with the hand.
Ezek. And thou, O deadly wounded wicked man, the ruler of Israel, whose day has come, in the time of the iniquity of the end,
Ezek. thus says the lord Jehovah: Remove the miter,  take off the crown. This shall be no more the same. Exalt that which is low,  abase that which is high.
Ezek. I will overturn, overturn, overturn it. This also shall be no more, until he comes whose right it is. And I will give it.
Ezek. And thou, son of man, prophesy,  say, Thus says the lord Jehovah concerning the sons of Ammon,  concerning their reproach. And say thou, A sword, a sword is drawn. It is polished for the slaughter, to cause it to devour, that it may be as lightning,
Ezek. while they see for thee false visions, while they divine lies to thee, to lay thee upon the necks of the wicked who are deadly wounded, whose day has come in the time of the iniquity of the end.
Ezek. Cause it to return into its sheath. In the place where thou were created, in the land of thy birth, I will judge thee.
Ezek. And I will pour out my indignation upon thee. I will blow upon thee with the fire of my wrath,  I will deliver thee into the hand of brutish men, skilful to destroy.
Ezek. Thou shall be for fuel to the fire. Thy blood shall be in the midst of the land. Thou shall no more be remembered. For I, Jehovah, have spoken it.
Ezek. Moreover the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Ezek. And thou, son of man, will thou judge, will thou judge the bloody city? Then cause her to know all her abominations.
Ezek. And thou shall say, Thus says the lord Jehovah: A city that sheds blood in the midst of her, that her time may come,  who makes idols against herself to defile her!
Ezek. Thou have become guilty in thy blood that thou have shed,  are defiled in thine idols which thou have made. And thou have caused thy days to draw near,  have come even to thy years. Therefore I have made thee a reproach to the nations,  a mocking to all the countries.
Ezek. Those that are near,  those that are far from thee, shall mock thee, thou infamous one, full of tumult.
Ezek. Behold, the rulers of Israel, each one according to his power, have been in thee to shed blood.
Ezek. In thee they have made light of father and mother. In the midst of thee they have dealt with the sojourner by oppression. In thee they have wronged the fatherless and the widow.
Ezek. Thou have despised my holy things,  have profaned my sabbaths.
Ezek. Slanderous men have been in thee to shed blood,  in thee they have eaten upon the mountains. In the midst of thee they have committed lewdness.
Ezek. In thee they have uncovered their fathers' nakedness. In thee they have humbled her who was unclean in her impurity.
Ezek. And one has committed abomination with his neighbor's wife,  another has lewdly defiled his daughter-in-law,  another in thee has humbled his sister, his father's daughter.
Ezek. In thee they have taken bribes to shed blood. Thou have taken interest and increase. And thou have greedily gained from thy neighbors by oppression,  have forgotten me, says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. Behold, therefore, I have smitten my hand at thy dishonest gain which thou have made,  at thy blood which has been in the midst of thee.
Ezek. Can thy heart endure, or can thy hands be strong, in the days that I shall deal with thee? I, Jehovah, have spoken it,  will do it.
Ezek. And I will scatter thee among the nations,  disperse thee through the countries,  I will consume thy filthiness out of thee.
Ezek. And thou shall be profaned in thyself, in the sight of the nations. And thou shall know that I am Jehovah.
Ezek. And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Ezek. Son of man, the house of Israel has become dross to me. All of them are brass,  tin,  iron,  lead, in the midst of the furnace. They are the dross of silver.
Ezek. Therefore thus says the lord Jehovah: Because ye have all become dross, therefore, behold, I will gather you into the midst of Jerusalem
Ezek. as they gather silver and brass and iron and lead and tin into the midst of the furnace, to blow the fire upon it, to melt it. So I will gather you in my anger and in my wrath,  I will lay you there,  melt you.
Ezek. Yea, I will gather you,  blow upon you with the fire of my wrath,  ye shall be melted in the midst of it.
Ezek. As silver is melted in the midst of the furnace, so ye shall be melted in the midst of it. And ye shall know that I, Jehovah, have poured out my wrath upon you.
Ezek. And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Ezek. Son of man, say to her, Thou are a land that is not cleansed, nor rained upon in the day of indignation.
Ezek. There is a conspiracy by her prophets in the midst of it, like a roaring lion ravening the prey. They have devoured souls. They take treasure and precious things. They have made her widows many in the midst thereof.
Ezek. Her priests have done violence to my law,  have profaned my holy things. They have made no distinction between the holy and the common, nor have they caused men to discern between the unclean and the clean,  have hid their eyes from my sabbaths,  I am profaned among them.
Ezek. Her rulers in the midst of it are like wolves ravening the prey, to shed blood, to destroy souls, that they may get dishonest gain.
Ezek. And her prophets have daubed for them with untempered mortar, seeing false visions,  divining lies to them, saying, Thus says the lord Jehovah, when Jehovah has not spoken.
Ezek. The people of the land have used oppression,  exercised robbery. Yea, they have vexed the poor and needy man,  have oppressed the sojourner wrongfully.
Ezek. And I sought for a man among them who should build up the wall,  stand in the gap before me for the land, that I should not destroy it,  I found none.
Ezek. Therefore I have poured out my indignation upon them. I have consumed them with the fire of my wrath. I have brought their own way upon their heads, says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. The word of Jehovah came again to me, saying,
Ezek. Son of man, there were two women, the daughters of one mother.
Ezek. And they played the harlot in Egypt. They played the harlot in their youth. There their breasts were pressed,  there was handled the bosom of their virginity.
Ezek. And the names of them were Oholah the elder,  Oholibah her sister. And they became mine,  they bore sons and daughters. And as for their names, Samaria is Oholah,  Jerusalem Oholibah.
Ezek. And Oholah played the harlot when she was mine,  she doted on her lovers, on the Assyrians her neighbors,
Ezek. who were clothed with blue, governors and rulers, all of them desirable young men, horsemen riding upon horses.
Ezek. And she bestowed her whoredoms upon them, the choicest men of Assyria all of them. And on whomever she doted, with all their idols she defiled herself.
Ezek. Neither has she left her whoredoms since Egypt. For in her youth they lie with her,  they handled the bosom of her virginity,  they poured out their whoredom upon her.
Ezek. Therefore I delivered her into the hand of her lovers, into the hand of the Assyrians, upon whom she doted.
Ezek. These uncovered her nakedness. They took her sons and her daughters,  they killed her with the sword. And she became a byword among women, for they executed judgments upon her.
Ezek. And her sister Oholibah saw this, yet she was more corrupt in her doting than she,  in her whoredoms which were more than the whoredoms of her sister.
Ezek. She doted upon the Assyrians, governors and rulers, her neighbors, clothed most gorgeously, horsemen riding upon horses, all of them desirable young men.
Ezek. And I saw that she was defiled. They both took one way.
Ezek. And she increased her whoredoms, for she saw men portrayed upon the wall, the images of the Chaldeans portrayed with vermilion,
Ezek. girded with belts upon their loins, with flowing turbans upon their heads, all of them rulers to look upon, according to the likeness of the Babylonians in Chaldea, the land of their nativity.
Ezek. And as soon as she saw them she doted upon them,  sent messengers to them into Chaldea.
Ezek. And the Babylonians came to her into the bed of love. And they defiled her with their whoredom,  she was polluted with them,  her soul was alienated from them.
Ezek. So she uncovered her whoredoms,  uncovered her nakedness. Then my soul was alienated from her, just as my soul was alienated from her sister.
Ezek. Yet she multiplied her whoredoms, remembering the days of her youth in which she had played the harlot in the land of Egypt.
Ezek. And she doted upon their paramours, whose flesh is as the flesh of donkeys,  whose issue is like the issue of horses.
Ezek. Thus thou called to remembrance the lewdness of thy youth, in the handling of thy bosom by the Egyptians for the breasts of thy youth.
Ezek. Therefore, O Oholibah, thus says the lord Jehovah: Behold, I will raise up thy lovers against thee, from whom thy soul is alienated,  I will bring them against thee on every side:
Ezek. the Babylonians and all the Chaldeans, Pekod and Shoa and Koa,  all the Assyrians with them, desirable young men, governors and rulers all of them, rulers and men of renown, all of them riding upon horses.
Ezek. And they shall come against thee with weapons, chariots,  wagons,  with a company of peoples. They shall set themselves against thee with buckler and shield and helmet round about. And I will commit the judgment to them,  they shall judge thee according to their judgments.
Ezek. And I will set my jealousy against thee,  they shall deal with thee in fury. They shall take away thy nose and thine ears,  thy residue shall fall by the sword. They shall take thy sons and thy daughters,  thy residue shall be devoured by the fire.
Ezek. They shall also strip thee of thy clothes,  take away thy fair jewels.
Ezek. Thus I will make thy lewdness to cease from thee,  thy whoredom from the land of Egypt, so that thou shall not lift up thine eyes to them, nor remember Egypt any more.
Ezek. For thus says the lord Jehovah: Behold, I will deliver thee into the hand of those whom thou hate, into the hand of those from whom thy soul is alienated.
Ezek. And they shall deal with thee in hatred,  shall take away all thy labor,  shall leave thee naked and bare. And the nakedness of thy whoredoms shall be uncovered, both thy lewdness and thy whoredoms.
Ezek. These things shall be done to thee, because thou have played the harlot after the nations,  because thou are polluted with their idols.
Ezek. Thou have walked in the way of thy sister, therefore I will give her cup into thy hand.
Ezek. Thus says the lord Jehovah: Thou shall drink of thy sister's cup, which is deep and large. Thou shall be laughed to scorn and had in derision. It contains much.
Ezek. Thou shall be filled with drunkenness and sorrow, with the cup of astonishment and desolation, with the cup of thy sister Samaria.
Ezek. Thou shall even drink it and drain it out. And thou shall gnaw the shards of it,  shall tear thy breasts, for I have spoken it, says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. Therefore thus says the lord Jehovah: Because thou have forgotten me,  cast me behind thy back, therefore thou also bear thy lewdness and thy whoredoms.
Ezek. Jehovah said moreover to me, Son of man, will thou judge Oholah and Oholibah? Then declare to them their abominations.
Ezek. For they have committed adultery,  blood is in their hands. And with their idols they have committed adultery. And they have also caused their sons, whom they bore to me, to pass through the fire for them to be devoured.
Ezek. Moreover they have done this to me: They have defiled my sanctuary in the same day,  have profaned my sabbaths.
Ezek. For when they had slain their sons to their idols, then they came the same day into my sanctuary to profane it, , lo, thus they have done in the midst of my house.
Ezek. And furthermore ye have sent for men who come from far, to whom a messenger was sent. And, lo, they came, for whom thou washed thyself, painted thine eyes,  decked thyself with ornaments,
Ezek. and sat upon a stately bed, with a table prepared before it, whereupon thou did set my incense and my oil.
Ezek. And the voice of a multitude being at ease was with her. And with men of the common sort, were brought drunkards from the wilderness,  they put bracelets upon the hands of those two women,  beautiful crowns upon their heads.
Ezek. Then I said of her who was old in adulteries, Now they will play the harlot with her,  she with them.
Ezek. And they went in to her, as they go in to a harlot. So they went in to Oholah and to Oholibah, the lewd women.
Ezek. And righteous men, they shall judge them with the judgment of adulteresses,  with the judgment of women who shed blood, because they are adulteresses,  blood is on their hands.
Ezek. For thus says the lord Jehovah: I will bring up a company against them,  will give them to be tossed to and fro and robbed.
Ezek. And the company shall stone them with stones,  dispatch them with their swords. They shall kill their sons and their daughters,  burn up their houses with fire.
Ezek. Thus I will cause lewdness to cease out of the land, that all women may be taught not to do according to your lewdness.
Ezek. And they shall recompense your lewdness upon you,  ye shall bear the sins of your idols. And ye shall know that I am the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. Again, in the ninth year, in the tenth month, in the tenth day of the month, the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Ezek. Son of man, write thee the name of the day, even of this selfsame day; the king of Babylon drew close to Jerusalem this selfsame day.
Ezek. And utter a parable to the rebellious house,  say to them, Thus says the lord Jehovah: Set on the caldron. Set it on,  also pour water into it.
Ezek. Gather the pieces of it into it, even every good piece, the thigh,  the shoulder; fill it with the choice bones.
Ezek. Take the choice of the flock,  also a pile of wood for the bones under the caldron. Make it boil well, yea, let the bones of it be boiled in the midst of it.
Ezek. Therefore thus says the lord Jehovah: Woe to the bloody city, to the caldron whose rust is therein,  whose rust has not gone out of it! Take out of it piece after piece. No lot has fallen upon it.
Ezek. For her blood is in the midst of her. She set it upon the bare rock. She did not pour it upon the ground to cover it with dust.
Ezek. That it may cause wrath to come up to take vengeance, I have set her blood upon the bare rock, that it should not be covered.
Ezek. Therefore thus says the lord Jehovah: Woe to the bloody city! I also will make the pile great.
Ezek. Heap on the wood; make the fire hot. Boil the flesh well,  make the broth thick. And let the bones be burned.
Ezek. Then set it empty upon the coals of it, that it may be hot,  the brass of it may burn,  that the filthiness of it may be molten in it, that the scum of it may be consumed.
Ezek. She has wearied herself with toil, yet her great scum does not go forth out of her, her scum by fire.
Ezek. In thy filthiness is lewdness. Because I have cleansed thee and thou were not cleansed, thou shall not be cleansed from thy filthiness any more, till I have caused my wrath toward thee to rest.
Ezek. I, Jehovah, have spoken it. It shall come to pass,  I will do it. I will not go back. I will neither spare, nor will I relent. According to thy ways,  according to thy doings, they shall judge thee, says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. Also the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Ezek. Son of man, behold, I take the desire of thine eyes away from thee with a stroke. Yet thou shall neither mourn nor weep. Neither shall thy tears run down.
Ezek. Sigh,  not aloud. Make no mourning for the dead. Bind thy headdress upon thee,  put thy shoes upon thy feet. And do not cover thy lips,  do not eat the bread of men.
Ezek. So I spoke to the people in the morning,  at evening my wife died. And I did in the morning as I was commanded.
Ezek. And the people said to me, Will thou not tell us what these things are to us, that thou do so?
Ezek. Then I said to them, The word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Ezek. Speak to the house of Israel, Thus says the lord Jehovah: Behold, I will profane my sanctuary, the pride of your power, the desire of your eyes,  that which your soul has compassion. And your sons and your daughters whom ye have left behind shall fall by the sword.
Ezek. And ye shall do as I have done. Ye shall not cover your lips, nor eat the bread of men.
Ezek. And your coverings shall be upon your heads,  your shoes upon your feet. Ye shall not mourn nor weep,  ye shall pine away in your iniquities,  moan one toward another.
Ezek. Thus Ezekiel shall be to you a sign, according to all that he has done ye shall do. When this comes, then ye shall know that I am the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. And thou, son of man, shall it not be in the day when I take from them their strength, the joy of their glory, the desire of their eyes,  that upon which they set their heart-their sons and their daughters-
Ezek. that in that day he who escapes shall come to thee, to cause thee to hear it with thine ears?
Ezek. In that day thy mouth shall be opened to him who is escaped,  thou shall speak,  no more be mute. So thou shall be a sign to them,  they shall know that I am Jehovah.
Ezek. And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Ezek. Son of man, set thy face toward the sons of Ammon,  prophesy against them.
Ezek. And say to the sons of Ammon, Hear the word of the lord Jehovah. Thus says the lord Jehovah: Because thou said, Aha, against my sanctuary when it was profaned,  against the land of Israel when it was made desolate,  against the house of Judah when they went into captivity,
Ezek. therefore, behold, I will deliver thee to the sons of the east for a possession,  they shall set their encampments in thee,  make their dwellings in thee. They shall eat thy fruit,  they shall drink thy milk.
Ezek. And I will make Rabbah a stable for camels,  the sons of Ammon a couching-place for flocks. And ye shall know that I am Jehovah.
Ezek. For thus says the lord Jehovah: Because thou have clapped thy hands,  stamped with the feet,  rejoiced with all the spite of thy soul against the land of Israel,
Ezek. therefore, behold, I have stretched out my hand upon thee,  will deliver thee for a spoil to the nations. And I will cut thee off from the peoples,  I will cause thee to perish out of the countries. I will destroy thee,  thou shall know that I am Jehovah.
Ezek. Thus says the lord Jehovah: Because Moab and Seir say, Behold, the house of Judah is like all the nations,
Ezek. therefore, behold, I will open the side of Moab from the cities, from his cities which are on his frontiers, the glory of the country-Beth-jeshimoth, Baal-meon,  Kiriathaim-
Ezek. open to the sons of the east, against the sons of Ammon. And I will give them for a possession, that the sons of Ammon may not be remembered among the nations.
Ezek. And I will execute judgments upon Moab,  they shall know that I am Jehovah.
Ezek. Thus says the lord Jehovah: Because Edom has dealt against the house of Judah by taking vengeance,  has greatly offended,  revenged himself upon them,
Ezek. therefore thus says the lord Jehovah: I will stretch out my hand upon Edom,  will cut off man and beast from it,  I will make it desolate. From Teman, even to Dedan they shall fall by the sword.
Ezek. And I will lay my vengeance upon Edom by the hand of my people Israel,  they shall do in Edom according to my anger and according to my wrath. And they shall know my vengeance, says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. Thus says the lord Jehovah: Because the Philistines have dealt by revenge,  have taken vengeance with spite of soul to destroy with perpetual enmity,
Ezek. therefore thus says the lord Jehovah: Behold, I will stretch out my hand upon the Philistines,  I will cut off the Cherethites,  destroy the remnant of the sea coast.
Ezek. And I will execute great vengeance upon them with wrathful rebukes. And they shall know that I am Jehovah when I shall lay my vengeance upon them.
Ezek. And it came to pass in the eleventh year, in the first day of the month, that the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Ezek. Son of man, because Tyre has said against Jerusalem, Aha, she is broken, the gate of the peoples. She has turned around to me. I shall be replenished, now that she is laid waste,
Ezek. therefore thus says the lord Jehovah: Behold, I am against thee, O Tyre,  will cause many nations to come up against thee, as the sea causes its waves to come up.
Ezek. And they shall destroy the walls of Tyre,  break down her towers. I will also scrape her dust from her,  make her a bare rock.
Ezek. She shall be a place for the spreading of nets in the midst of the sea, for I have spoken it, says the lord Jehovah. And she shall become a spoil to the nations,
Ezek. and her daughters who are in the field shall be slain with the sword. And they shall know that I am Jehovah.
Ezek. For thus says the lord Jehovah: Behold, I will bring upon Tyre, Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, king of kings, from the north, with horses,  with chariots,  with horsemen,  a company,  many people.
Ezek. He shall kill thy daughters in the field with the sword. And he shall make forts against thee,  cast up a mound against thee,  raise up the buckler against thee.
Ezek. And he shall set his battering engines against thy walls,  with his axes he shall break down thy towers.
Ezek. Because of the abundance of his horses their dust shall cover thee. Thy walls shall shake at the noise of the horsemen,  of the wagons,  of the chariots, when he shall enter into thy gates, as men enter into a city in which a breach is made.
Ezek. With the hoofs of his horses he shall tread down all thy streets. He shall kill thy people with the sword,  the pillars of thy strength shall go down to the ground.
Ezek. And they shall make a spoil of thy riches,  make a prey of thy merchandise. And they shall break down thy walls,  destroy thy pleasant houses,  they shall lay thy stones and thy timber and thy dust in the midst of the waters.
Ezek. And I will cause the noise of thy songs to cease,  the sound of thy harps shall no more be heard.
Ezek. And I will make thee a bare rock; thou shall be a place for the spreading of nets. Thou shall be built no more, for I Jehovah have spoken it, says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. Thus says the lord Jehovah to Tyre: Shall not the isles shake at the sound of thy fall, when the wounded groan, when the slaughter is made in the midst of thee?
Ezek. Then all the rulers of the sea shall come down from their thrones,  lie aside their robes,  strip off their broidered garments. They shall clothe themselves with trembling. They shall sit upon the ground,  shall tremble every moment,  be astonished at thee.
Ezek. And they shall take up a lamentation over thee,  say to thee, How thou are destroyed, who were inhabited by seafaring men, the renowned city that was strong in the sea, she and her inhabitants, who caused their terror to be on all who dwelt there!
Ezek. Now the isles shall tremble in the day of thy fall. Yea, the isles that are in the sea shall be dismayed at thy departure.
Ezek. For thus says the lord Jehovah: When I shall make thee a desolate city, like the cities that are not inhabited, when I shall bring up the deep upon thee,  the great waters shall cover thee,
Ezek. then I will bring thee down with those who descend into the pit, to the people of old time,  will make thee to dwell in the nether parts of the earth, in the places that are desolate of old, with those who go down to the pit, that thou not be inhabited. And I will set glory in the land of the living.
Ezek. I will make thee a horror,  thou shall no more have any being. Though thou be sought for, yet thou shall never be found again, says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. The word of Jehovah came again to me, saying,
Ezek. And thou, son of man, take up a lamentation over Tyre,
Ezek. and say to Tyre, O thou that dwells at the entry of the sea, that is the merchant of the peoples to many isles, thus says the lord Jehovah: Thou, O Tyre, have said, I am perfect in beauty.
Ezek. Thy borders are in the heart of the seas. Thy builders have perfected thy beauty.
Ezek. They have made all thy planks of fir trees from Senir. They have taken a cedar from Lebanon to make a mast for thee.
Ezek. Of the oaks of Bashan they have made thine oars. They have made thy benches of ivory inlaid in boxwood, from the isles of Kittim.
Ezek. Of fine linen with broidered work from Egypt was thy sail, that it might be to thee for an ensign. Blue and purple from the isles of Elishah was thine awning.
Ezek. The inhabitants of Sidon and Arvad were thy rowers. Thy wise men, O Tyre, were in thee; they were thy pilots.
Ezek. The old men of Gebal and the wise men thereof were thy caulkers in thee. All the ships of the sea with their mariners were in thee to deal in thy merchandise.
Ezek. Persia and Lud and Put were in thine army, thy men of war. They hung the shield and helmet in thee. They set forth thy comeliness.
Ezek. The men of Arvad with thine army were upon thy walls round about,  valorous men were in thy towers. They hung their shields upon thy walls round about. They have perfected thy beauty.
Ezek. Tarshish was thy merchant because of the multitude of all kinds of riches, with silver, iron, tin,  lead. They traded for thy wares.
Ezek. Javan, Tubal,  Meshech, they were thy merchants. They traded the persons of men,  vessels of brass for thy merchandise.
Ezek. Those of the house of Togarmah traded for thy wares with horses and war-horses and mules.
Ezek. The men of Dedan were thy merchants. Many isles were the mart of thy hand. They brought thee in exchange horns of ivory and ebony.
Ezek. Syria was thy merchant because of the multitude of thy handiworks. They traded for thy wares with emeralds, purple,  embroidered work,  fine linen,  coral,  rubies.
Ezek. Judah,  the land of Israel, they were thy merchants. They traded for thy merchandise wheat of Minnith,  pannag,  honey,  oil,  balm.
Ezek. Damascus was thy merchant for the multitude of thy handiworks, because of the multitude of all kinds of riches, with the wine of Helbon,  white wool.
Ezek. Vedan and Javan traded with yarn for thy wares. Bright iron, cassia,  calamus, were among thy merchandise.
Ezek. Dedan was thy merchant in precious cloths for riding.
Ezek. Arabia,  all the rulers of Kedar, they were the merchants of thy hand, in lambs,  rams,  goats. In these they were thy merchants.
Ezek. The merchants of Sheba and Raamah, they were thy merchants. They traded for thy wares with the chief of all spices,  with all precious stones,  gold.
Ezek. Haran and Canneh and Eden, the merchants of Sheba, Asshur and Chilmad, were thy merchants.
Ezek. These were thy merchants in choice wares, in wrappings of blue and embroidered work,  in chests of rich apparel, bound with cords and made of cedar, among thy merchandise.
Ezek. The ships of Tarshish were thy caravans for thy merchandise. And thou were replenished,  made very glorious in the heart of the seas.
Ezek. Thy rowers have brought thee into great waters. The east wind has broken thee in the heart of the seas.
Ezek. Thy riches,  thy wares, thy merchandise, thy mariners,  thy pilots, thy caulkers,  the dealers in thy merchandise,  all thy men of war, who are in thee, with all thy company which is in the midst of thee, shall fall into the heart of the seas in the day of thy ruin.
Ezek. At the sound of the cry of thy pilots the suburbs shall shake.
Ezek. And all who handled the oar, the mariners,  all the pilots of the sea, shall come down from their ships. They shall stand upon the land,
Ezek. and shall cause their voice to be heard over thee,  shall cry bitterly,  shall cast up dust upon their heads. They shall wallow themselves in the ashes.
Ezek. And they shall make themselves bald for thee,  gird with sackcloth,  they shall weep for thee in bitterness of soul with bitter mourning.
Ezek. And in their wailing they shall take up a lamentation for thee,  lament over thee, saying, Who is there like Tyre, like her that is brought to silence in the midst of the sea?
Ezek. When thy wares went forth out of the seas, thou filled many peoples. Thou enriched the kings of the earth with the multitude of thy riches and of thy merchandise.
Ezek. In the time that thou were broken by the seas in the depths of the waters, thy merchandise and all thy company fell in the midst of thee.
Ezek. All the inhabitants of the isles are astonished at thee,  their kings are horribly afraid; they are troubled in their countenance.
Ezek. The merchants among the peoples hiss at thee. Thou have become a horror,  thou shall nevermore have any being.
Ezek. The word of Jehovah came again to me, saying,
Ezek. Son of man, say to the ruler of Tyre, Thus says the lord Jehovah: Because thy heart is lifted up,  thou have said, I am a god. I sit in the seat of God, in the midst of the seas. Yet thou are man,  not God, though thou did set thy heart as the heart of God.
Ezek. Behold, thou are wiser than Daniel. There is no secret that is hidden from thee.
Ezek. By thy wisdom and by thine understanding thou have gotten thee riches,  have gotten gold and silver into thy treasures.
Ezek. By thy great wisdom and by thy traffic thou have increased thy riches. And thy heart is lifted up because of thy riches.
Ezek. Therefore thus says the lord Jehovah: Because thou have set thy heart as the heart of God,
Ezek. therefore, behold, I will bring strangers upon thee, the terrible of the nations,  they shall draw their swords against the beauty of thy wisdom,  they shall defile thy brightness.
Ezek. They shall bring thee down to the pit,  thou shall die the death of those who are slain, in the heart of the seas.
Ezek. Will thou yet say before him who slays thee, I am God? But thou are man,  not God, in the hand of him who wounds thee.
Ezek. Thou shall die the death of the uncircumcised by the hand of strangers. For I have spoken it, says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. Moreover the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Ezek. Son of man, take up a lamentation over the king of Tyre,  say to him, Thus says the lord Jehovah: Thou seal up the sum, full of wisdom,  perfect in beauty.
Ezek. Thou were in Eden, the garden of God. Every precious stone was thy covering, the sardius, the topaz,  the diamond, the beryl, the onyx,  the jasper, the sapphire, the emerald,  the carbuncle,  gold. The workmanship of thy tambourine and of thy pipes was in thee. In the day that thou were created they were prepared.
Ezek. Thou were the anointed cherub who covers. And I set thee, so that thou were upon the holy mountain of God. Thou have walked up and down in the midst of the stones of fire.
Ezek. Thou were perfect in thy ways from the day that thou were created, till unrighteousness was found in thee.
Ezek. By the abundance of thy commerce they filled the midst of thee with violence,  thou have sinned. Therefore I have cast thee out of the mountain of God as profane,  I have destroyed thee, O covering cherub, from the midst of the stones of fire.
Ezek. Thy heart was lifted up because of thy beauty. Thou have corrupted thy wisdom because of thy brightness. I have cast thee to the ground. I have laid thee before kings, that they may behold thee.
Ezek. By the multitude of thine iniquities, in the unrighteousness of thy commerce, thou have profaned thy sanctuaries. Therefore I have brought forth a fire from the midst of thee. It has devoured thee,  I have turned thee to ashes upon the earth in the sight of all those who behold thee.
Ezek. All those who know thee among the peoples shall be astonished at thee. Thou have become a horror,  thou shall nevermore have any being.
Ezek. And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Ezek. Son of man, set thy face toward Sidon,  prophesy against it,
Ezek. and say, Thus says the lord Jehovah: Behold, I am against thee, O Sidon. And I will be glorified in the midst of thee. And they shall know that I am Jehovah, when I shall have executed judgments in her,  shall be sanctified in her.
Ezek. For I will send pestilence into her,  blood into her streets. And the wounded shall fall in the midst of her, with the sword upon her on every side. And they shall know that I am Jehovah.
Ezek. And there shall no more be a pricking brier to the house of Israel, nor a hurting thorn of any who are round about them, who did spite to them. And they shall know that I am the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. Thus says the lord Jehovah: When I shall have gathered the house of Israel from the peoples among whom they are scattered,  shall be sanctified in them in the sight of the nations, then they shall dwell in their own land which I gave to my servant Jacob.
Ezek. And they shall dwell securely therein. Yea, they shall build houses,  plant vineyards,  shall dwell securely, when I have executed judgments upon all those who do them spite round about them. And they shall know that I am Jehovah their God.
Ezek. In the tenth year, in the tenth month, in the twelfth day of the month, the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Ezek. Son of man, set thy face against Pharaoh king of Egypt,  prophesy against him,  against all Egypt.
Ezek. Speak,  say, Thus says the lord Jehovah: Behold, I am against thee, Pharaoh king of Egypt, the great monster that lies in the midst of his rivers, that has said, My river is my own,  I have made it for myself.
Ezek. And I will put hooks in thy jaws,  I will cause the fish of thy rivers to stick to thy scales,  I will bring thee up out of the midst of thy rivers, with all the fish of thy rivers which stick to thy scales.
Ezek. And I will cast thee forth into the wilderness, thee and all the fish of thy rivers. Thou shall fall upon the open field. Thou shall not be brought together, nor gathered. I have given thee for food to the beasts of the earth and to the birds of the heavens.
Ezek. And all the inhabitants of Egypt shall know that I am Jehovah, because they have been a staff of reed to the house of Israel.
Ezek. When they took hold of thee by thy hand, thou broke,  tore all their shoulders. And when they leaned upon thee, thou broke,  made all their loins to be at a stand still.
Ezek. Therefore thus says the lord Jehovah: Behold, I will bring a sword upon thee,  will cut off from thee man and beast.
Ezek. And the land of Egypt shall be a desolation and a waste. And they shall know that I am Jehovah. Because he has said, The river is mine,  I have made it,
Ezek. therefore, behold, I am against thee,  against thy rivers. And I will make the land of Egypt an utter waste and desolation, from the tower of Seveneh even to the border of Ethiopia.
Ezek. No foot of man shall pass through it, nor foot of beast shall pass through it. Neither shall it be inhabited forty years.
Ezek. And I will make the land of Egypt a desolation in the midst of the countries that are desolate. And her cities among the cities that are laid waste shall be a desolation forty years. And I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations,  will disperse them through the countries.
Ezek. For thus says the lord Jehovah: At the end of forty years I will gather the Egyptians from the peoples where they were scattered,
Ezek. and I will bring back the captivity of Egypt,  will cause them to return into the land of Pathros, into the land of their birth. And they shall be a base kingdom there.
Ezek. It shall be the basest of the kingdoms, nor shall it lift itself up any more above the nations. And I will diminish them, that they shall no more rule over the nations.
Ezek. And it shall be no more the confidence of the house of Israel, bringing iniquity to remembrance, when they turn to look after them. And they shall know that I am the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. And it came to pass in the twenty-seventh year, in the first month, in the first day of the month, the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Ezek. Son of man, Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon caused his army to serve a great service against Tyre. Every head was made bald,  every shoulder was worn, yet he had no wages, nor his army, from Tyre, for the service that he had served against it.
Ezek. Therefore thus says the lord Jehovah: Behold, I will give the land of Egypt to Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon,  he shall carry off her multitude,  take her spoil,  take her prey. And it shall be the wages for his army.
Ezek. I have given him the land of Egypt as his recompense for which he served, because they worked for me, says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. In that day I will cause a horn to bud forth to the house of Israel,  I will give thee the opening of the mouth in the midst of them. And they shall know that I am Jehovah.
Ezek. The word of Jehovah came again to me, saying,
Ezek. Son of man, prophesy,  say, Thus says the lord Jehovah: Wail ye, Alas for the day!
Ezek. For the day is near, even the day of Jehovah is near. It shall be a day of clouds, a time of the nations.
Ezek. And a sword shall come upon Egypt,  anguish shall be in Ethiopia, when the slain shall fall in Egypt,  they shall take away her multitude,  her foundations shall be broken down.
Ezek. Ethiopia,  Put,  Lud,  all the mixed people,  Cub,  the sons of the land that is in league, shall fall with them by the sword.
Ezek. Thus says Jehovah: They also who uphold Egypt shall fall,  the pride of her power shall come down. From the tower of Seveneh they shall fall in it by the sword, says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. And they shall be desolate in the midst of the countries that are desolate,  her cities shall be in the midst of the cities that are wasted.
Ezek. And they shall know at I am Jehovah when I have set a fire in Egypt,  all her helpers are destroyed.
Ezek. In that day messengers shall go forth from before me in ships to make the careless Ethiopians afraid,  there shall be anguish upon them, as in the day of Egypt, for, lo, it comes.
Ezek. Thus says the lord Jehovah: I will also make the multitude of Egypt to cease by the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon.
Ezek. He and his people with him, the terrible of the nations, shall be brought in to destroy the land. And they shall draw their swords against Egypt,  fill the land with the slain.
Ezek. And I will make the rivers dry,  will sell the land into the hand of evil men. And I will make the land desolate,  all that is therein, by the hand of strangers. I, Jehovah, have spoken it.
Ezek. Thus says the lord Jehovah: I will also destroy the idols,  I will cause the images to cease from Memphis. And there shall no more be a ruler from the land of Egypt. And I will put a fear in the land of Egypt.
Ezek. And I will make Pathros desolate,  will set a fire in Zoan,  will execute judgments upon No.
Ezek. And I will pour my wrath upon Sin, the stronghold of Egypt,  I will cut off the multitude of No.
Ezek. And I will set a fire in Egypt. Sin shall be in great anguish,  No shall be broken up,  Memphis shall have adversaries in the daytime.
Ezek. The young men of Aven and of Pi-beseth shall fall by the sword,  these cities shall go into captivity.
Ezek. At Tehaphnehes also the day shall withdraw itself when I shall break the yokes of Egypt there,  the pride of her power shall cease in her. As for her, a cloud shall cover her,  her daughters shall go into captivity.
Ezek. Thus I will execute judgments upon Egypt,  they shall know that I am Jehovah.
Ezek. And it came to pass in the eleventh year, in the first month, in the seventh day of the month, that the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Ezek. Son of man, I have broken the arm of Pharaoh king of Egypt. And, lo, it has not been bound up, to apply medicines, to put a bandage to bind it, that it be strong to hold the sword.
Ezek. Therefore thus says the lord Jehovah: Behold, I am against Pharaoh king of Egypt. And I will break his arms, the strong arm,  that which was broken,  I will cause the sword to fall out of his hand.
Ezek. And I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations,  will disperse them through the countries.
Ezek. And I will strengthen the arms of the king of Babylon,  put my sword in his hand. But I will break the arms of Pharaoh,  he shall groan before him with the groanings of a mortally wounded man.
Ezek. And I will hold up the arms of the king of Babylon,  the arms of Pharaoh shall fall down. And they shall know that I am Jehovah when I shall put my sword into the hand of the king of Babylon,  he shall stretch it out upon the land of Egypt.
Ezek. And I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations,  disperse them through the countries. And they shall know that I am Jehovah.
Ezek. And it came to pass in the eleventh year, in the third month, in the first day of the month, that the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Ezek. Son of man, say to Pharaoh king of Egypt,  to his multitude, Whom are thou like in thy greatness?
Ezek. Behold, the Assyrian was a cedar in Lebanon with fair branches,  with a forest-like shade,  of high stature,  its top was among the thick boughs.
Ezek. The waters nourished it. The deep made it to grow. The rivers of it ran round about its plantation,  it sent out its channels to all the trees of the field.
Ezek. Therefore its stature was exalted above all the trees of the field,  its boughs were multiplied,  its branches became long because of many waters, when it shot them forth.
Ezek. All the birds of the heavens made their nests in its boughs,  under its branches all the beasts of the field brought forth their young,  under its shadow dwelt all great nations.
Ezek. Thus it was beautiful in its greatness, in the length of its branches, for its root was by many waters.
Ezek. The cedars in the garden of God could not dim it. The fir trees were not like its boughs,  the plane trees were not as its branches, nor was any tree in the garden of God like it in its beauty.
Ezek. I made it beautiful by the multitude of its branches, so that all the trees of Eden, that were in the garden of God, envied it.
Ezek. Therefore thus said the lord Jehovah: Because thou are exalted in stature,  he has set his top among the thick boughs,  his heart is lifted up in his height,
Ezek. I will even deliver him into the hand of the mighty one of the nations. He shall surely deal with him; I have driven him out for his wickedness.
Ezek. And strangers, the terrible of the nations, have cut him off,  have left him. Upon the mountains and in all the valleys his branches are fallen,  his boughs are broken by all the watercourses of the land. And all the peoples of the earth have gone down from his shadow,  have left him.
Ezek. All the birds of the heavens shall dwell upon his ruin,  all the beasts of the field shall be upon his branches,
Ezek. to the end that none of all the trees by the waters exalt themselves in their stature, neither set their top among the thick boughs, nor that their mighty ones stand up on their height, even all that drink water. For they are all delivered to death, to the nether parts of the earth, in the midst of the sons of men, with those who go down to the pit.
Ezek. Thus says the lord Jehovah: In the day when he went down to Sheol I caused a mourning. I covered the deep for him. And I restrained the rivers of it,  the great waters were stayed. And I caused Lebanon to mourn for him,  all the trees of the field fainted for him.
Ezek. I made the nations to shake at the sound of his fall when I cast him down to Sheol with those who descend into the pit. And all the trees of Eden, the choice and best of Lebanon, all that drink water, were comforted in the nether parts of the earth.
Ezek. They also went down into Sheol with him to those who are slain by the sword, yea, those who were his arm, that dwelt under his shadow in the midst of the nations.
Ezek. To whom are thou thus like in glory and in greatness among the trees of Eden? Yet thou shall be brought down with the trees of Eden to the nether parts of the earth. Thou shall lie in the midst of the uncircumcised, with those who are slain by the sword. This is Pharaoh and all his multitude, says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. And it came to pass in the twelfth year, in the twelfth month, in the first day of the month, that the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Ezek. Son of man, take up a lamentation over Pharaoh king of Egypt,  say to him, Thou were compared to a young lion of the nations. Yet thou are as a monster in the seas,  thou broke forth with thy rivers,  troubled the waters with thy feet,  fouled their rivers.
Ezek. Thus says the lord Jehovah: I will spread out my net upon thee with a company of many peoples,  they shall bring thee up in my net.
Ezek. And I will leave thee upon the land. I will cast thee forth upon the open field,  will cause all the birds of the heavens to settle upon thee,  I will satisfy the beasts of the whole earth with thee.
Ezek. And I will lay thy flesh upon the mountains,  fill the valleys with thy height.
Ezek. I will also water the land, in which thou swim, with thy blood, even to the mountains. And the watercourses shall be full of thee.
Ezek. And when I shall extinguish thee, I will cover the heavens,  make the stars of it dark. I will cover the sun with a cloud,  the moon shall not give its light.
Ezek. All the bright lights of heaven I will make dark over thee,  set darkness upon thy land, says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. I will also vex the hearts of many peoples when I shall bring thy destruction among the nations, into the countries which thou have not known.
Ezek. Yea, I will make many peoples amazed at thee. And their kings shall be horribly afraid for thee when I shall brandish my sword before them. And they shall tremble at every moment, each man for his own life, in the day of thy fall.
Ezek. For thus says the lord Jehovah: The sword of the king of Babylon shall come upon thee.
Ezek. By the swords of the mighty I will cause thy multitude to fall. They are all the terrible of the nations. And they shall bring to nothing the pride of Egypt,  all the multitude of it shall be destroyed.
Ezek. I will destroy also all the beasts thereof from beside many waters. Neither the foot of man shall trouble them any more, nor the hoofs of beasts trouble them.
Ezek. Then I will make their waters clear,  cause their rivers to run like oil, says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. When I shall make the land of Egypt desolate and waste, a land destitute of that of which it was full, when I shall smite all those who dwell therein, then they shall know that I am Jehovah.
Ezek. This is the lamentation with which they shall lament. The daughters of the nations shall lament with that over Egypt,  over all her multitude. They shall lament with that, says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. It came to pass also in the twelfth year, in the fifteenth day of the month, that the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Ezek. Son of man, wail for the multitude of Egypt,  cast them down, even her,  the daughters of the famous nations, to the nether parts of the earth, with those who go down into the pit.
Ezek. Whom do thou pass in beauty? Go down,  be thou laid with the uncircumcised.
Ezek. They shall fall in the midst of those who are slain by the sword. She is delivered to the sword. Draw her away and all her multitudes.
Ezek. The strong among the mighty shall speak to him out of the midst of Sheol with those who help him. They have gone down. They lie still, even the uncircumcised, slain by the sword.
Ezek. Asshur is there and all her company. Her graves are round about her, all of them slain, fallen by the sword,
Ezek. whose graves are set in the outermost parts of the pit. And her company is round about her grave, all of them slain, fallen by the sword, who caused terror in the land of the living.
Ezek. There is Elam and all her multitude round about her grave, all of them slain, fallen by the sword, who have gone down uncircumcised into the nether parts of the earth, who caused their terror in the land of the living,  have borne their shame with those who go down to the pit.
Ezek. They have set a bed for her in the midst of the slain with all her multitude. Her graves are round about her, all of them uncircumcised, slain by the sword. For their terror was caused in the land of the living,  they have borne their shame with those who go down to the pit. He is put in the midst of those who are slain.
Ezek. There is Meshech, Tubal,  all their multitude. Their graves are round about them, all of them uncircumcised, slain by the sword, for they caused their terror in the land of the living.
Ezek. And they shall not lie with the mighty who are fallen of the uncircumcised, who have gone down to Sheol with their weapons of war,  have laid their swords under their heads. But their iniquities are upon their bones, for they were the terror of the mighty in the land of the living.
Ezek. But thou shall be broken in the midst of the uncircumcised,  shall lie with those who are slain by the sword.
Ezek. There is Edom, its kings and all its rulers, who in their might are laid with those who are slain by the sword. They shall lie with the uncircumcised,  with those who go down to the pit.
Ezek. There are the rulers of the north, all of them,  all the Sidonians, who have gone down with the slain. In the terror which they caused by their might they are put to shame. And they lie uncircumcised with those who are slain by the sword,  bear their shame with those who go down to the pit.
Ezek. Pharaoh shall see them,  shall be comforted over all his multitude, even Pharaoh and all his army, slain by the sword, says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. For I have put his terror in the land of the living,  he shall be laid in the midst of the uncircumcised, with those who are slain by the sword, even Pharaoh and all his multitude, says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Ezek. Son of man, speak to the sons of thy people,  say to them, When I bring the sword upon a land,  the people of the land take a man from among them,  set him for their watchman,
Ezek. if, when he sees the sword come upon the land, he blows the trumpet,  warns the people,
Ezek. then whoever hears the sound of the trumpet,  takes no warning, if the sword comes,  takes him away, his blood shall be upon his own head.
Ezek. He heard the sound of the trumpet,  took no warning; his blood shall be upon him. Whereas if he had taken warning, he would have delivered his soul.
Ezek. But if the watchman sees the sword come,  does not blow the trumpet,  the people are not warned,  the sword comes,  takes any person from among them, he is taken away in his iniquity,  I will require his blood at the watchman's hand.
Ezek. So thou, son of man, I have set thee a watchman to the house of Israel. Therefore hear the word at my mouth,  give them warning from me.
Ezek. When I say to the wicked man, O wicked man, thou shall surely die,  thou do not speak to warn the wicked man from his way, that wicked man shall die in his iniquity,  I will require his blood at thy hand.
Ezek. Nevertheless, if thou warn the wicked man of his way to turn from it,  he does not turn from his way, he shall die in his iniquity,  thou have delivered thy soul.
Ezek. And thou, son of man, say to the house of Israel, Thus ye speak, saying, Our transgressions and our sins are upon us,  we pine away in them. How then can we live?
Ezek. Say to them, As I live, says the lord Jehovah, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked man,  that the wicked man turn from his way and live. Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways, for why will ye die, O house of Israel?
Ezek. And thou, son of man, say to the sons of thy people, The righteousness of the righteous man shall not deliver him in the day of his transgression. And as for the wickedness of the wicked man, he shall not fall by it in the day that he turns from his wickedness, nor shall he who is righteous be able to live by it in the day that he sins.
Ezek. When I say to the righteous man, that he shall surely live, if he trusts his righteousness,  commits iniquity, none of his righteous deeds shall be remembered,  in his iniquity that he has committed, in it he shall die.
Ezek. Again, when I say to the wicked man, Thou shall surely die, if he turns from his sin,  does that which is lawful and right,
Ezek. if the wicked man restores the pledge, gives again that which he had taken by robbery, walks in the statutes of life, committing no iniquity, he shall surely live; he shall not die.
Ezek. None of his sins that he has committed shall be remembered against him. He has done that which is lawful and right; he shall surely live.
Ezek. Yet the sons of thy people say, The way of the Lord is not equitable. But as for them, their way is not equitable.
Ezek. When the righteous man turns from his righteousness,  commits iniquity, he shall even die in it.
Ezek. And when the wicked man turns from his wickedness,  does that which is lawful and right, he shall live thereby.
Ezek. Yet ye say, The way of the Lord is not equitable. O house of Israel, I will judge you everyone according to his ways.
Ezek. And it came to pass in the twelfth year of our captivity, in the tenth month, in the fifth day of the month, that a man who had escaped out of Jerusalem came to me, saying, The city is smitten.
Ezek. Now the hand of Jehovah had been upon me in the evening, before he who escaped came. And he had opened my mouth until he came to me in the morning. And my mouth was opened,  I was no more mute.
Ezek. And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Ezek. Son of man, those who inhabit those waste places in the land of Israel speak, saying, Abraham was one,  he inherited the land,  we are many; the land is given us for inheritance.
Ezek. Therefore say to them, Thus says the lord Jehovah: Ye eat with the blood,  lift up your eyes to your idols,  shed blood. And shall ye possess the land?
Ezek. Ye stand upon your sword, ye work abomination,  ye defile every man his neighbor's wife. And shall ye possess the land?
Ezek. Thus shall thou say to them. Thus says the lord Jehovah: As I live, surely those who are in the waste places shall fall by the sword,  he who is in the open field I will give to the beasts to be devoured,  those who are in the strongholds and in the caves shall die of the pestilence.
Ezek. And I will make the land a desolation and an astonishment. And the pride of her power shall cease. And the mountains of Israel shall be desolate, so that none shall pass through.
Ezek. Then they shall know that I am Jehovah when I have made the land a desolation and an astonishment, because of all their abominations which they have committed.
Ezek. And as for thee, son of man, the sons of thy people talk of thee by the walls and in the doors of the houses,  speak one to another, each one to his brother, saying, Come, I pray you,  hear what is the word that comes forth from Jehovah.
Ezek. And they come to thee as the people come,  they sit before thee as my people. And they hear thy words,  do not do them. For with their mouth they show much love,  their heart goes after their gain.
Ezek. And, lo, thou are to them as a very lovely song of he who has a pleasant voice,  can play well on an instrument. For they hear thy words,  they do not do them.
Ezek. And when this comes to pass, (behold, it comes), then they shall know that a prophet has been among them.
Ezek. And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Ezek. Son of man, prophesy against the shepherds of Israel. Prophesy,  say to them, even to the shepherds, Thus says the Lord Jehovah: Woe to the shepherds of Israel who feed themselves! Should not the shepherds feed the sheep?
Ezek. Ye eat the fat,  ye clothe yourselves with the wool. Ye kill the fatlings,  ye do not feed the sheep.
Ezek. Ye have not strengthened the diseased, nor have ye healed that which was sick, nor have ye bound up that which was broken, nor have ye brought back that which was driven away, nor have ye sought that which was lost,  ye have ruled over them with force and with rigor.
Ezek. And they were scattered because there was no shepherd. And they became food to all the beasts of the field,  were scattered.
Ezek. My sheep wandered through all the mountains,  upon every high hill. Yea, my sheep were scattered upon all the face of the earth,  there was none who searched or sought.
Ezek. Therefore, ye shepherds, hear the word of Jehovah:
Ezek. As I live, says the lord Jehovah, surely inasmuch as my sheep became a prey,  my sheep became food to all the beasts of the field, because there was no shepherd, nor did my shepherds search for my sheep,  the shepherds fed themselves,  did not feed my sheep,
Ezek. therefore, ye shepherds, hear the word of Jehovah.
Ezek. Thus says the lord Jehovah: Behold, I am against the shepherds,  I will require my sheep at their hand,  cause them to cease from feeding the sheep. Neither shall the shepherds feed themselves any more,  I will deliver my sheep from their mouth, that they may not be food for them.
Ezek. For thus says the lord Jehovah: Behold, I myself, even I, will search for my sheep,  will seek them out.
Ezek. As a shepherd seeks out his flock, in the day that he is among his sheep that are scattered abroad, so I will seek out my sheep,  I will deliver them out of all places where they have been scattered in the cloudy and dark day.
Ezek. And I will bring them out from the peoples,  gather them from the countries,  will bring them into their own land. And I will feed them upon the mountains of Israel, by the watercourses,  in all the inhabited places of the country.
Ezek. I will feed them with good pasture,  their fold shall be upon the mountains of the height of Israel. There they shall lie down in a good fold,  on fat pasture they shall feed upon the mountains of Israel.
Ezek. I myself will be the shepherd of my sheep,  I will cause them to lie down, says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. I will seek that which was lost,  will bring back that which was driven away,  will bind up that which was broken,  will strengthen that which was sick,  I will destroy the fat and the strong. I will feed them in justice.
Ezek. And as for you, O my flock, thus says the lord Jehovah: Behold, I judge between sheep and sheep, the rams and the he-goats.
Ezek. Does it seem a small thing to you to have fed upon the good pasture,  ye must tread down with your feet the residue of your pasture,  to have drunk of the clear waters,  ye must foul the residue with your feet?
Ezek. And as for my sheep, they eat that which ye have trodden with your feet,  they drink that which ye have fouled with your feet.
Ezek. Therefore thus says the lord Jehovah to them: Behold, I, even I, will judge between the fat sheep and the lean sheep.
Ezek. Because ye thrust with side and with shoulder,  push all the diseased with your horns, till ye have scattered them abroad,
Ezek. therefore I will save my flock,  they shall no more be a prey. And I will judge between sheep and sheep.
Ezek. And I will set up one shepherd over them,  he shall feed them, even my servant David. He shall feed them,  he shall be their shepherd.
Ezek. And I, Jehovah, will be their God,  my servant David ruler among them. I, Jehovah, have spoken it.
Ezek. And I will make a covenant of peace with them,  will cause evil beasts to cease out of the land,  they shall dwell securely in the wilderness,  sleep in the woods.
Ezek. And I will make them and the places round about my hill a blessing,  I will cause the shower to come down in its season; there shall be showers of blessing.
Ezek. And the tree of the field shall yield its fruit,  the earth shall yield its increase,  they shall be secure in their land. And they shall know that I am Jehovah when I have broken the bars of their yoke,  have delivered them out of the hand of those who made bondmen of them.
Ezek. And they shall no more be a prey to the nations, nor shall the beasts of the earth devour them,  they shall dwell securely,  none shall make them afraid.
Ezek. And I will raise up to them a plantation for renown,  they shall no more be consumed with famine in the land, nor bear the shame of the nations any more.
Ezek. And they shall know that I, Jehovah, their God am with them,  that they, the house of Israel, are my people, says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. And ye my sheep, the sheep of my pasture, are men,  I am your God, says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. Moreover the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Ezek. Son of man, set thy face against mount Seir,  prophesy against it.
Ezek. And say to it, Thus says the lord Jehovah: Behold, I am against thee, O mount Seir,  I will stretch out my hand against thee,  I will make thee a desolation and an astonishment.
Ezek. I will lay thy cities waste,  thou shall be desolate. And thou shall know that I am Jehovah.
Ezek. Because thou have had a perpetual enmity,  have given over the sons of Israel to the power of the sword in the time of their calamity, in the time of the iniquity of the end,
Ezek. therefore, as I live, says the lord Jehovah, I will prepare thee to blood,  blood shall pursue thee. Since thou have not hated blood, therefore blood shall pursue thee.
Ezek. Thus I will make mount Seir an astonishment and a desolation,  I will cut off from it him who passes through and him who returns.
Ezek. And I will fill its mountains with its slain. In thy hills and in thy valleys and in all thy watercourses they shall fall who are slain with the sword.
Ezek. I will make thee a perpetual desolation,  thy cities shall not be inhabited. And ye shall know that I am Jehovah.
Ezek. Because thou have said, These two nations and these two countries shall be mine,  we will possess it, whereas Jehovah was there,
Ezek. therefore, as I live, says the lord Jehovah, I will do according to thine anger,  according to thine envy which thou have shown out of thy hatred against them. And I will make myself known among them when I shall judge thee.
Ezek. And thou shall know that I, Jehovah, have heard all thy revilings which thou have spoken against the mountains of Israel, saying, They are laid desolate. They are given us to devour.
Ezek. And ye have magnified yourselves against me with your mouth,  have multiplied your words against me. I have heard it.
Ezek. Thus says the lord Jehovah: When the whole earth rejoices, I will make thee desolate.
Ezek. As thou rejoiced over the inheritance of the house of Israel, because it was desolate, so I will do to thee. Thou shall be desolate, O mount Seir,  all Edom, even all of it,  they shall know that I am Jehovah.
Ezek. And thou, son of man, prophesy to the mountains of Israel,  say, Ye mountains of Israel, hear the word of Jehovah.
Ezek. Thus says the lord Jehovah: Because the enemy has said against you, Aha! and, The ancient high places are ours in possession,
Ezek. therefore prophesy,  say, Thus says the lord Jehovah: Because, even because they have made you desolate,  swallowed you up on every side, that ye might be a possession to the residue of the nations,  ye are taken up in the lips of talkers,  the evil report of the people,
Ezek. therefore, ye mountains of Israel, hear the word of the lord Jehovah. Thus says the lord Jehovah to the mountains and to the hills, to the watercourses and to the valleys, to the desolate wastes and to the cities that are forsaken, which have become a prey and derision to the residue of the nations that are round about,
Ezek. therefore thus says the lord Jehovah: Surely in the fire of my jealousy I have spoken against the residue of the nations,  against all Edom, who have appointed my land to themselves for a possession with the joy of all their heart, with spite of soul, to cast it out for a prey.
Ezek. Therefore prophesy concerning the land of Israel,  say to the mountains and to the hills, to the watercourses and to the valleys, Thus says the lord Jehovah: Behold, I have spoken in my jealousy and in my wrath, because ye have borne the shame of the nations.
Ezek. Therefore thus says the lord Jehovah: I have sworn, saying, Surely the nations that are round about you, they shall bear their shame.
Ezek. But ye, O mountains of Israel, ye shall shoot forth your branches,  yield your fruit to my people Israel, for they are at hand to come.
Ezek. For, behold, I am for you,  I will turn into you,  ye shall be tilled and sown.
Ezek. And I will multiply men upon you, all the house of Israel, even all of it,  the cities shall be inhabited,  the waste places shall be built.
Ezek. And I will multiply upon you man and beast,  they shall increase and be fruitful. And I will cause you to be inhabited according to your former estate,  will do better to you than at your beginnings. And ye shall know that I am Jehovah.
Ezek. Yea, I will cause men to walk upon you, even my people Israel,  they shall possess thee,  thou shall be their inheritance,  thou shall no more henceforth bereave them of sons.
Ezek. Thus says the lord Jehovah: Because they say to you, Thou O land are a devourer of men,  have been a bereaver of thy nation,
Ezek. therefore thou shall no more devour men, nor bereave thy nation any more, says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. Neither will I let thee hear any more the shame of the nations, nor shall thou bear the reproach of the peoples any more, nor shall thou cause thy nation to stumble any more, says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. Moreover the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Ezek. Son of man, when the house of Israel dwelt in their own land, they defiled it by their way and by their doings. Their way before me was as the uncleanness of a woman in her impurity.
Ezek. Therefore I poured out my wrath upon them for the blood which they had poured out upon the land,  because they had defiled it with their idols.
Ezek. And I scattered them among the nations,  they were dispersed through the countries. I judged them according to their way and according to their doings.
Ezek. And when they came to the nations where they went, they profaned my holy name, in that men said of them, These are the people of Jehovah,  have gone forth out of his land.
Ezek. But I had regard for my holy name, which the house of Israel had profaned among the nations where they went.
Ezek. Therefore say to the house of Israel, Thus says the lord Jehovah: I do this not for your sake, O house of Israel,  for my holy name, which ye have profaned among the nations where ye went.
Ezek. And I will sanctify my great name, which has been profaned among the nations, which ye have profaned in the midst of them. And the nations shall know that I am Jehovah, says the lord Jehovah, when I shall be sanctified in you before their eyes.
Ezek. For I will take you from among the nations,  gather you out of all the countries,  will bring you into your own land.
Ezek. And I will sprinkle clean water upon you,  ye shall be clean. I will cleanse you from all your filthiness,  from all your idols.
Ezek. I will also give you a new heart,  I will put a new spirit within you. And I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh,  I will give you a heart of flesh.
Ezek. And I will put my Spirit within you,  cause you to walk in my statutes,  ye shall keep my ordinances,  do them.
Ezek. And ye shall dwell in the land that I gave to your fathers,  ye shall be my people,  I will be your God.
Ezek. And I will save you from all your uncleannesses. And I will call for the grain,  will multiply it,  lay no famine upon you.
Ezek. And I will multiply the fruit of the tree,  the increase of the field, that ye may no more receive the reproach of famine among the nations.
Ezek. Then ye shall remember your evil ways,  your doings that were not good. And ye shall loathe yourselves in your own sight for your iniquities and for your abominations.
Ezek. I do this not for your sake, says the lord Jehovah; be it known to you. Be ashamed and confounded for your ways, O house of Israel.
Ezek. Thus says the lord Jehovah: In the day that I cleanse you from all your iniquities, I will cause the cities to be inhabited,  the waste places shall be built.
Ezek. And the land that was desolate shall be tilled, whereas it was a desolation in the sight of all who passed by.
Ezek. And they shall say, This land that was desolate has become like the garden of Eden. And the waste and desolate and ruined cities are fortified and inhabited.
Ezek. Then the nations that are left round about you shall know that I, Jehovah, have built the ruined places,  planted that which was desolate. I, Jehovah, have spoken it,  I will do it.
Ezek. Thus says the lord Jehovah: For this, moreover, I will be inquired of by the house of Israel, to do it for them. I will increase them with men like a flock.
Ezek. As the flock for sacrifice, as the flock of Jerusalem in her appointed feasts, so shall the waste cities be filled with flocks of men. And they shall know that I am Jehovah.
Ezek. The hand of Jehovah was upon me,  he brought me out in the Spirit of Jehovah,  set me down in the midst of the valley,  it was full of bones.
Ezek. And he caused me to pass by them round about. And, behold, there were very many in the open valley, , lo, they were very dry.
Ezek. And he said to me, Son of man, can these bones live? And I answered, O lord Jehovah, thou know.
Ezek. Again he said to me, Prophesy over these bones,  say to them, O ye dry bones, hear the word of Jehovah.
Ezek. Thus says the lord Jehovah to these bones: Behold, I will cause breath to enter into you,  ye shall live.
Ezek. And I will lay sinews upon you,  will bring up flesh upon you,  cover you with skin,  put breath in you,  ye shall live. And ye shall know that I am Jehovah.
Ezek. So I prophesied as I was commanded. And as I prophesied, there was a noise, , behold, an earthquake,  the bones came together, bone to its bone.
Ezek. And I beheld, , lo, there were sinews upon them,  flesh came up,  skin covered them above,  there was no breath in them.
Ezek. Then he said to me, Prophesy to the wind. Prophesy, son of man,  say to the wind, Thus says the lord Jehovah: Come from the four winds, O breath,  breathe upon these slain, that they may live.
Ezek. So I prophesied as he commanded me,  the breath came into them,  they lived,  stood up upon their feet, an exceedingly great army.
Ezek. Then he said to me, Son of man, these bones are the whole house of Israel. Behold, they say, Our bones are dried up,  our hope is lost. We are clean cut off.
Ezek. Therefore prophesy,  say to them, Thus says the lord Jehovah: Behold, I will open your graves,  cause you to come up out of your graves, O my people,  I will bring you into the land of Israel.
Ezek. And ye shall know that I am Jehovah when I have opened your graves,  caused you to come up out of your graves, O my people.
Ezek. And I will put my Spirit in you,  ye shall live. And I will place you in your own land. And ye shall know that I, Jehovah, have spoken it and performed it, says Jehovah.
Ezek. The word of Jehovah came again to me, saying,
Ezek. And thou, son of man, take thee one stick,  write upon it, For Judah,  for the sons of Israel his companions. Then take another stick,  write upon it, For Joseph, the stick of Ephraim,  for all the house of Israel his companions.
Ezek. And join them one to another into one stick for thyself, that they may become one in thy hand.
Ezek. And when the sons of thy people shall speak to thee, saying, Will thou not show us what thou mean by these?
Ezek. say to them, Thus says the lord Jehovah: Behold, I will take the stick of Joseph, which is in the hand of Ephraim,  the tribes of Israel his companions,  I will put them with it, even with the stick of Judah,  make them one stick,  they shall be one in my hand.
Ezek. And the sticks on which thou write shall be in thy hand before their eyes.
Ezek. And say to them, Thus says the lord Jehovah: Behold, I will take the sons of Israel from among the nations where they have gone,  will gather them on every side,  bring them into their own land.
Ezek. And I will make them one nation in the land, upon the mountains of Israel,  one king shall be king to them all. And they shall no more be two nations, nor shall they be divided into two kingdoms any more at all.
Ezek. Neither shall they defile themselves any more with their idols, nor with their detestable things, nor with any of their transgressions,  I will save them out of all their dwelling-places in which they have sinned,  will cleanse them. So they shall be my people,  I will be their God.
Ezek. And my servant David shall be king over them,  they all shall have one shepherd. They shall also walk in my ordinances,  observe my statutes,  do them.
Ezek. And they shall dwell in the land that I have given to Jacob my servant, in which your fathers dwelt. And they shall dwell therein, they,  their sons,  their son's sons, forever. And David my servant shall be their ruler forever.
Ezek. Moreover I will make a covenant of peace with them. It shall be an everlasting covenant with them,  I will place them,  multiply them,  will set my sanctuary in the midst of them for evermore.
Ezek. My tabernacle shall also be with them,  I will be their God,  they shall be my people.
Ezek. And the nations shall know that I am Jehovah, who sanctifies Israel, when my sanctuary shall be in the midst of them for evermore.
Ezek. And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Ezek. Son of man, set thy face toward Gog, of the land of Magog, the ruler of Rosh, Meshech,  Tubal,  prophesy against him.
Ezek. And say, Thus says the lord Jehovah: Behold, I am against thee, O Gog, ruler of Rosh, Meshech,  Tubal.
Ezek. And I will turn thee about,  put hooks into thy jaws,  I will bring thee forth,  all thine army, horses and horsemen, all of them clothed in full armor, a great company with buckler and shield, all of them handling swords,
Ezek. Persia, Cush,  Put with them, all of them with shield and helmet,
Ezek. Gomer,  all his hordes, the house of Togarmah in the outermost parts of the north,  all his hordes, even many peoples with thee.
Ezek. Be thou prepared. Yea, prepare thyself, thou,  all thy companies that are assembled to thee,  be thou a guard to them.
Ezek. After many days thou shall be visited. In the latter years thou shall come into the land that is brought back from the sword, that is gathered out of many peoples, upon the mountains of Israel, which have been a continual waste,  it is brought forth out of the peoples,  they shall dwell securely, all of them.
Ezek. And thou shall ascend. Thou shall come like a storm. Thou shall be like a cloud to cover the land, thou,  all thy hordes,  many peoples with thee.
Ezek. Thus says the lord Jehovah: It shall come to pass in that day, that things shall come into thy mind,  thou shall devise an evil plan.
Ezek. And thou shall say, I will go up to the land of unwalled villages. I will go to those who are at rest, who dwell securely, all of them dwelling without walls,  having neither bars nor gates,
Ezek. to take the spoil and to take the prey, to turn thy hand against the waste places that are now inhabited,  against the people who are gathered out of the nations, who have gotten cattle and goods, who dwell in the middle of the earth.
Ezek. Sheba,  Dedan,  the merchants of Tarshish, with all the young lions of it, shall say to thee, Have thou come to take the spoil? Have thou assembled thy company to take the prey, to carry away silver and gold, to take away cattle and goods, to take great spoil?
Ezek. Therefore, son of man, prophesy,  say to Gog, Thus says the lord Jehovah: In that day when my people Israel dwell securely, shall thou not know it?
Ezek. And thou shall come from thy place out of the outermost parts of the north, thou,  many peoples with thee, all of them riding upon horses, a great company and a mighty army.
Ezek. And thou shall come up against my people Israel, as a cloud to cover the land. It shall come to pass in the latter days, that I will bring thee against my land, that the nations may know me, when I shall be sanctified in thee, O Gog, before their eyes.
Ezek. Thus says the lord Jehovah: Are thou he of whom I spoke in old time by my servants the prophets of Israel, who prophesied in those days for many years that I would bring thee against them?
Ezek. And it shall come to pass in that day, when Gog shall come against the land of Israel, says the lord Jehovah, that my wrath shall come up into my nostrils.
Ezek. For I have spoken in my jealousy and in the fire of my wrath. Surely in that day there shall be a great shaking in the land of Israel,
Ezek. so that the fishes of the sea,  the birds of the heavens,  the beasts of the field,  all creeping things that creep upon the earth,  all the men who are upon the face of the earth, shall shake at my presence. And the mountains shall be thrown down,  the steep places shall fall,  every wall shall fall to the ground.
Ezek. And I will call for a sword against him to all my mountains, says the lord Jehovah. Every man's sword shall be against his brother.
Ezek. And I will enter into judgment with him with pestilence and with blood. And I will rain upon him,  upon his hordes,  upon the many peoples who are with him, an overflowing shower,  great hailstones, fire,  brimstone.
Ezek. And I will magnify myself,  sanctify myself,  I will make myself known in the eyes of many nations. And they shall know that I am Jehovah.
Ezek. And thou, son of man, prophesy against Gog,  say, Thus says the lord Jehovah: Behold, I am against thee, O Gog, ruler of Rosh, Meshech,  Tubal.
Ezek. And I will turn thee about,  will lead thee on,  will cause thee to come up from the outermost parts of the north,  I will bring thee upon the mountains of Israel.
Ezek. And I will smite thy bow out of thy left hand,  will cause thine arrows to fall out of thy right hand.
Ezek. Thou shall fall upon the mountains of Israel, thou,  all thy hordes,  the peoples who are with thee. I will give thee to the ravenous birds of every sort,  to the beasts of the field to be devoured.
Ezek. Thou shall fall upon the open field, for I have spoken it, says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. And I will send a fire on Magog,  on those who dwell securely in the isles. And they shall know that I am Jehovah.
Ezek. And I will make my holy name known in the midst of my people Israel, nor will I allow my holy name to be profaned any more. And the nations shall know that I am Jehovah, the Holy One in Israel.
Ezek. Behold, it comes,  it shall be done, says the lord Jehovah. This is the day of which I have spoken.
Ezek. And those who dwell in the cities of Israel shall go forth,  shall make fires of the weapons and burn them, both the shields and the bucklers, the bows and the arrows,  the hand staves,  the spears. And they shall make fires of them seven years,
Ezek. so that they shall take no wood out of the field, nor cut down any out of the forests, for they shall make fires of the weapons. And they shall plunder those who plundered them,  rob those who robbed them, says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will give to Gog a place for burial in Israel: the valley of those who pass through on the east of the sea. And it shall stop those who pass through,  they shall bury Gog and all his multitude there. And they shall call it The valley of Hamon-gog.
Ezek. And the house of Israel shall be burying them seven months, that they may cleanse the land.
Ezek. Yea, all the people of the land shall bury them,  it shall be to them a renown in the day that I shall be glorified, says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. And they shall set apart men of continual employment, who shall pass through the land. And, with those who pass through, those that bury those who remain upon the face of the land, to cleanse it, after the end of seven months they shall search.
Ezek. And those who pass through the land shall pass through,  when any man sees a man's bone, then he shall set up a sign by it till the buriers have buried it in the valley of Hamon-gog.
Ezek. And Hamonah shall also be the name of a city. Thus they shall cleanse the land.
Ezek. And thou, son of man, thus says the lord Jehovah: Speak to the birds of every sort,  to every beast of the field, Assemble yourselves,  come. Gather yourselves on every side to my sacrifice that I sacrifice for you, even a great sacrifice upon the mountains of Israel, that ye may eat flesh and drink blood.
Ezek. Ye shall eat the flesh of the mighty,  drink the blood of the rulers of the earth, of rams, of lambs,  of goats, of bullocks, all of them fatlings of Bashan.
Ezek. And ye shall eat fat till ye be full,  drink blood till ye be drunken, of my sacrifice which I have sacrificed for you.
Ezek. And ye shall be filled at my table with horses and chariots, with mighty men,  with all men of war, says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. And I will set my glory among the nations. And all the nations shall see my judgment that I have executed,  my hand that I have laid upon them.
Ezek. So the house of Israel shall know that I am Jehovah their God, from that day and forward.
Ezek. And the nations shall know that the house of Israel went into captivity for their iniquity, because they trespassed against me,  I hid my face from them. So I gave them into the hand of their adversaries,  they fell all of them by the sword.
Ezek. I did to them according to their uncleanness and according to their transgressions. And I hid my face from them.
Ezek. Therefore thus says the lord Jehovah: Now I will bring back the captivity of Jacob,  have mercy upon the whole house of Israel. And I will be jealous for my holy name.
Ezek. And they shall bear their shame,  all their trespasses by which they have trespassed against me, when they shall dwell securely in their land. And none shall make them afraid
Ezek. when I have brought them back from the peoples,  gathered them out of their enemies' lands,  am sanctified in them in the sight of many nations.
Ezek. And they shall know that I am Jehovah their God, in that I caused them to go into captivity among the nations,  have gathered them to their own land. And I will leave none of them any more there,
Ezek. nor will I hide my face any more from them. For I have poured out my Spirit upon the house of Israel, says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. In the twenty-fifth year of our captivity, in the beginning of the year, in the tenth day of the month, in the fourteenth year after the city was smitten, in the selfsame day, the hand of Jehovah was upon me,  he brought me there.
Ezek. He brought me in the visions of God into the land of Israel,  set me down upon a very high mountain, upon which was as it were the frame of a city on the south.
Ezek. And he brought me there, , behold, there was a man, whose appearance was like the appearance of brass, with a line of flax in his hand,  a measuring reed. And he stood in the gate.
Ezek. And the man said to me, Son of man, behold with thine eyes,  hear with thine ears,  set thy heart upon all that I shall show thee. For thou are brought here to the intent that I may show them to thee. Declare all that thou see to the house of Israel.
Ezek. And, behold, a wall on the outside of the house round about,  in the man's hand a measuring reed six cubits long, of a cubit and a handbreadth each. So he measured the thickness of the building, one reed,  the height, one reed.
Ezek. Then he came to the gate which looks toward the east,  went up the steps of it. And he measured the threshold of the gate, one reed broad,  the other threshold, one reed broad.
Ezek. And every little chamber was one reed long,  one reed broad,  the space between the little chambers was five cubits. And the threshold of the gate by the porch of the gate toward the house was one reed.
Ezek. He also measured the porch of the gate toward the house, one reed.
Ezek. Then he measured the porch of the gate, eight cubits,  the posts thereof, two cubits. And the porch of the gate was toward the house.
Ezek. And the little chambers of the gate eastward were three on this side,  three on that side; those three were of one measure. And the posts had one measure on this side and on that side.
Ezek. And he measured the breadth of the opening of the gate, ten cubits,  the length of the gate, thirteen cubits,
Ezek. and a border before the little chambers, one cubit on this side,  a border, one cubit on that side,  the little chambers, six cubits on this side,  six cubits on that side.
Ezek. And he measured the gate from the roof of the one little chamber to the roof of the other, a breadth of twenty-five cubits, door against door.
Ezek. He also made posts, sixty cubits. And the court reached to the posts, round about the gate.
Ezek. And from the forefront of the gate at the entrance to the forefront of the inner porch of the gate were fifty cubits.
Ezek. And there were closed windows to the little chambers,  to their posts within the gate round about,  likewise to the arches. And windows were round about inward,  upon each post were palm trees.
Ezek. Then he brought me into the outer court. And, lo, there were chambers and a pavement, made for the court round about; thirty chambers were upon the pavement.
Ezek. And the pavement was by the side of the gates, answerable to the length of the gates, even the lower pavement.
Ezek. Then he measured the breadth from the forefront of the lower gate to the forefront of the inner court outside, a hundred cubits, both on the east and on the north.
Ezek. And the gate of the outer court whose view is toward the north, he measured the length of it and the breadth of it.
Ezek. And the little chambers of it were three on this side and three on that side. And the posts of it and the arches of it were according to the measure of the first gate: the length of it was fifty cubits,  the breadth twenty-five cubits.
Ezek. And the windows of it,  the arches of it,  the palm trees of it, were according to the measure of the gate whose view is toward the east. And they went up to it by seven steps,  the arches of it were before them.
Ezek. And there was a gate to the inner court opposite the other gate, both on the north and on the east,  he measured from gate to gate a hundred cubits.
Ezek. And he led me toward the south. And, behold, a gate toward the south. And he measured the posts of it and the arches of it according to these measures.
Ezek. And there were windows in it,  in the arches of it round about, like those windows: the length was fifty cubits,  the breadth twenty-five cubits.
Ezek. And there were seven steps to go up to it,  the arches of it were before them. And it had palm trees, one on this side,  another on that side, upon the posts of it.
Ezek. And there was a gate to the inner court toward the south. And he measured from gate to gate toward the south a hundred cubits.
Ezek. Then he brought me to the inner court by the south gate. And he measured the south gate according to these measures,
Ezek. and the little chambers of it,  the posts of it,  the arches of it, according to these measures. And there were windows in it and in the arches of it round about. It was fifty cubits long,  twenty-five cubits broad.
Ezek. And there were arches round about, twenty-five cubits long,  five cubits broad.
Ezek. And the arches of it were toward the outer court,  palm trees were upon the posts of it. And the ascent to it had eight steps.
Ezek. And he brought me into the inner court toward the east. And he measured the gate according to these measures,
Ezek. and the little chambers of it,  the posts of it,  the arches of it, according to these measures. And there were windows in it and in the arches of it round about. It was fifty cubits long,  twenty-five cubits broad.
Ezek. And the arches of it were toward the outer court,  palm trees were upon the posts of it, on this side,  on that side. And the ascent to it had eight steps.
Ezek. And he brought me to the north gate. And he measured it according to these measures,
Ezek. the little chambers of it, the posts of it,  the arches of it. And there were windows in it round about. The length was fifty cubits,  the breadth twenty-five cubits.
Ezek. And the posts of it were toward the outer court,  palm trees were upon the posts of it, on this side,  on that side. And the ascent to it had eight steps.
Ezek. And a chamber with the door of it was by the posts at the gates. There they washed the burnt offering.
Ezek. And in the porch of the gate were two tables on this side,  two tables on that side, to kill on it the burnt offering and the sin offering and the trespass offering.
Ezek. And on the one side outside, at the going up to the entry of the gate toward the north, were two tables,  on the other side, which belonged to the porch of the gate, were two tables.
Ezek. Four tables were on this side,  four tables on that side, by the side of the gate, eight tables, upon which they killed the sacrifices.
Ezek. And there were four tables for the burnt offering, of hewn stone, a cubit and a half long,  a cubit and a half broad,  one cubit high, upon which they laid the instruments of which they killed the burnt offering and the sacrifice.
Ezek. And the hooks, a handbreadth long, were fastened inside round about. And upon the tables was the flesh of the oblation.
Ezek. And outside the inner gate were chambers for the singers in the inner court, which was at the side of the north gate,  their view was toward the south, one at the side of the east gate having the view toward the north.
Ezek. And he said to me, This chamber, whose view is toward the south, is for the priests, the keepers of the charge of the house.
Ezek. And the chamber whose view is toward the north is for the priests, the keepers of the charge of the altar. These are the sons of Zadok, who from among the sons of Levi come near to Jehovah to minister to him.
Ezek. And he measured the court, a hundred cubits long,  a hundred cubits broad, foursquare. And the altar was before the house.
Ezek. Then he brought me to the porch of the house,  measured each post of the porch, five cubits on this side,  five cubits on that side. And the breadth of the gate was three cubits on this side,  three cubits on that side.
Ezek. The length of the porch was twenty cubits,  the breadth eleven cubits, even by the steps by which they went up to it. And there were pillars by the posts, one on this side,  another on that side.
Ezek. And he brought me to the temple,  measured the posts, six cubits broad on the one side,  six cubits broad on the other side, which was the breadth of the tabernacle.
Ezek. And the breadth of the entrance was ten cubits. And the sides of the entrance were five cubits on the one side,  five cubits on the other side. And he measured the length of it, forty cubits,  the breadth, twenty cubits.
Ezek. Then he went inward,  measured each post of the entrance, two cubits,  the entrance, six cubits,  the breadth of the entrance, seven cubits.
Ezek. And he measured the length of it, twenty cubits,  the breadth, twenty cubits, before the temple. And he said to me, This is the most holy place.
Ezek. Then he measured the wall of the house, six cubits,  the breadth of every side-chamber, four cubits, round about the house on every side.
Ezek. And the side-chambers were in three stories, one over another,  thirty in order. And they entered into the wall which belonged to the house for the side-chambers round about, that they might be attached to it,  not be attached to the wall of the house.
Ezek. And the side-chambers were broader as they circled the house higher and higher, for the circling of the house went higher and higher round about the house. Therefore the breadth of the house continued upward,  so increased from the lowest chamber to the highest by the middle chamber.
Ezek. I also saw that the house had a raised basement round about. The foundations of the side-chambers were a full reed of six great cubits.
Ezek. The thickness of the wall, which was for the side-chambers, on the outside, was five cubits. And that which was left was the place of the side-chambers that belonged to the house.
Ezek. And between the chambers was a breadth of twenty cubits round about the house on every side.
Ezek. And the doors of the side-chambers were toward the place that was left, one door toward the north,  another door toward the south. And the breadth of the place that was left was five cubits round about.
Ezek. And the building that was before the separate place at the side toward the west was seventy cubits broad,  the wall of the building was five cubits thick round about,  the length of it ninety cubits.
Ezek. So he measured the house, a hundred cubits long,  the separate place,  the building, with the walls of it, a hundred cubits long,
Ezek. also the breadth of the face of the house,  of the separate place toward the east, a hundred cubits.
Ezek. And he measured the length of the building before the separate place which was at the back of it,  the galleries of it on the one side and on the other side, a hundred cubits,  the inner temple,  the porches of the court,
Ezek. the thresholds,  the closed windows,  the galleries round about on their three stories, opposite the threshold, paneled with wood round about,  from the ground up to the windows, (now the windows were covered),
Ezek. to the space above the door, even to the inner house,  outside,  by all the wall round about inside and outside, by measure.
Ezek. And it was made with cherubim and palm trees,  a palm tree was between cherub and cherub. And every cherub had two faces,
Ezek. so that there was the face of a man toward the palm tree on the one side,  the face of a young lion toward the palm tree on the other side, made through all the house round about.
Ezek. Cherubim and palm trees were made from the ground to above the door. Thus was the wall of the temple.
Ezek. As for the temple, the door-posts were squared. And as for the face of the sanctuary, the appearance was as the appearance of the temple.
Ezek. The altar was of wood, three cubits high,  the length of it two cubits,  the corners of it,  the length of it,  the walls of it, were of wood. And he said to me, This is the table that is before Jehovah.
Ezek. And the temple and the sanctuary had two doors.
Ezek. And the doors had two leaves apiece, two turning leaves, two for the one door,  two leaves for the other.
Ezek. And there were made on them, on the doors of the temple, cherubim and palm trees, just as were made upon the walls. And there was a threshold of wood upon the face of the porch outside.
Ezek. And there were closed windows and palm trees on the one side and on the other side, on the sides of the porch. Thus were the side-chambers of the house,  the thresholds.
Ezek. Then he brought me forth into the outer court, the way toward the north. And he brought me into the chamber that was opposite the separate place,  which was opposite the building toward the north.
Ezek. In front was the north door, the length of a hundred cubits,  the breadth was fifty cubits.
Ezek. Opposite the twenty which belonged to the inner court,  opposite the pavement which belonged to the outer court, was gallery against gallery in the third story.
Ezek. And before the chambers was a walk of ten cubits' breadth inward, a way of one cubit,  their doors were toward the north.
Ezek. Now the upper chambers were shorter, for the galleries took away from these, more than from the lower and the middlemost, in the building.
Ezek. For they were in three stories,  they did not have pillars as the pillars of the courts. Therefore the uppermost was narrowed more than the lowest and the middlemost from the ground.
Ezek. And the wall that was outside by the side of the chambers, toward the outer court before the chambers, the length of it was fifty cubits.
Ezek. For the length of the chambers that were in the outer court was fifty cubits. And, lo, of those on the front of the temple were a hundred cubits.
Ezek. And from under these chambers was the entry on the east side, as going into them from the outer court.
Ezek. In the thickness of the wall of the court toward the east, before the separate place,  before the building, there were chambers.
Ezek. And the way before them was like the appearance of the way of the chambers which were toward the north. According to their length so was their breadth. And all their exits were both according to their fashions,  according to their doors.
Ezek. And according to the doors of the chambers that were toward the south was a door at the head of the way, even the way directly before the wall toward the east, as entering into them.
Ezek. Then he said to me, The north chambers and the south chambers, which are before the separate place, they are the holy chambers, where the priests that are near to Jehovah shall eat the most holy things. There they shall lay the most holy things,  the meal offering,  the sin offering,  the trespass offering, for the place is holy.
Ezek. When the priests enter in, then they shall not go out of the holy place into the outer court,  they shall lay their garments there in which they minister, for they are holy. And they shall put on other garments,  shall approach to that which pertains to the people.
Ezek. Now when he had made an end of measuring the inner house, he brought me forth by the way of the gate whose view is toward the east,  measured it round about.
Ezek. He measured on the east side with the measuring reed, five hundred reeds, with the measuring reed round about.
Ezek. He measured on the north side five hundred reeds with the measuring reed round about.
Ezek. He measured on the south side five hundred reeds with the measuring reed.
Ezek. He turned about to the west side,  measured five hundred reeds with the measuring reed.
Ezek. He measured it on the four sides. It had a wall round about, the length five hundred,  the breadth five hundred, to make a separation between that which was holy and that which was common.
Ezek. Afterward he brought me to the gate, even the gate that looks toward the east.
Ezek. And, behold, the glory of the God of Israel came from the way of the east. And his voice was like the sound of many waters,  the earth shone with his glory.
Ezek. And it was according to the appearance of the vision which I saw, even according to the vision that I saw when I came to destroy the city. And the visions were like the vision that I saw by the river Chebar. And I fell upon my face.
Ezek. And the glory of Jehovah came into the house by the way of the gate whose view is toward the east.
Ezek. And the Spirit took me up,  brought me into the inner court, , behold, the glory of Jehovah filled the house.
Ezek. And I heard speaking to me out of the house,  a man stood by me.
Ezek. And he said to me, Son of man, this is the place of my throne,  the place of the soles of my feet, where I will dwell in the midst of the sons of Israel forever. And the house of Israel shall no more defile my holy name, neither they, nor their kings, by their whoredom,  by the dead bodies of their kings in their high places,
Ezek. in their setting of their threshold by my threshold,  their door-post beside my door-post,  there was but the wall between me and them. And they have defiled my holy name by their abominations which they have committed. Therefore I have consumed them in my anger.
Ezek. Now let them put away their whoredom,  the dead bodies of their kings, far from me,  I will dwell in the midst of them forever.
Ezek. Thou, son of man, show the house to the house of Israel, that they may be ashamed of their iniquities,  let them measure the pattern.
Ezek. And if they be ashamed of all that they have done, make known to them the form of the house,  the fashion of it,  the exits of it,  the entrances of it,  all the forms of it,  all the ordinances of it,  all the forms of it,  all the laws of it. And write it in their sight, that they may keep the whole form of it,  all the ordinances of it,  do them.
Ezek. This is the law of the house. Upon the top of the mountain the whole limit of it round about shall be most holy. Behold, this is the law of the house.
Ezek. And these are the measures of the altar by cubits (the cubit is a cubit and a handbreadth). The bottom shall be a cubit,  the breadth a cubit,  the border of it by the edge of it round about a span. And this shall be the base of the altar.
Ezek. And from the bottom upon the ground to the lower ledge shall be two cubits,  the breadth one cubit. And from the lesser ledge to the greater ledge shall be four cubits,  the breadth a cubit.
Ezek. And the upper altar shall be four cubits. And from the altar hearth and upward there shall be four horns.
Ezek. And the altar hearth shall be twelve long by twelve broad, square in the four sides of it.
Ezek. And the ledge shall be fourteen long by fourteen broad in the four sides of it. And the border about it shall be half a cubit,  the bottom of it shall be a cubit round about. And the steps of it shall look toward the east.
Ezek. And he said to me, Son of man, thus says the lord Jehovah: These are the ordinances of the altar in the day when they shall make it, to offer burnt offerings on it,  to sprinkle blood on it.
Ezek. Thou shall give to the priests the Levites who are of the seed of Zadok, who are near to me, to minister to me, says the lord Jehovah, a young bullock for a sin offering.
Ezek. And thou shall take of the blood of it,  put it on the four horns of it,  on the four corners of the ledge,  upon the border round about. Thus thou shall cleanse it and make atonement for it.
Ezek. Thou shall also take the bullock of the sin offering,  it shall be burnt in the appointed place of the house, outside the sanctuary.
Ezek. And on the second day thou shall offer a he-goat without blemish for a sin offering. And they shall cleanse the altar, as they cleansed it with the bullock.
Ezek. When thou have made an end of cleansing it, thou shall offer a young bullock without blemish,  a ram out of the flock without blemish.
Ezek. And thou shall bring them near before Jehovah,  the priests shall cast salt upon them,  they shall offer them up for a burnt offering to Jehovah.
Ezek. Seven days thou shall prepare each day a goat for a sin offering. They shall also prepare a young bullock,  a ram out of the flock, without blemish.
Ezek. Seven days they shall make atonement for the altar and purify it. So they shall consecrate it.
Ezek. And when they have accomplished the days, it shall be that upon the eighth day,  forward, the priests shall make your burnt offerings upon the altar,  your peace offerings. And I will accept you, says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. Then he brought me back by the way of the outer gate of the sanctuary, which looks toward the east. And it was shut.
Ezek. And Jehovah said to me, This gate shall be shut. It shall not be opened, nor shall any man enter in by it, for Jehovah, the God of Israel, has entered in by it. Therefore it shall be shut.
Ezek. As for the ruler, he shall sit in it as ruler to eat bread before Jehovah. He shall enter by the way of the porch of the gate,  shall go out by the way of the same.
Ezek. Then he brought me by the way of the north gate before the house. And I looked, , behold, the glory of Jehovah filled the house of Jehovah. And I fell upon my face.
Ezek. And Jehovah said to me, Son of man, mark well,  behold with thine eyes,  hear with thine ears all that I say to thee concerning all the ordinances of the house of Jehovah,  all the laws of it. And mark well the entrance of the house, with every exit of the sanctuary.
Ezek. And thou shall say to the rebellious, even to the house of Israel, Thus says the lord Jehovah: O ye house of Israel, let it suffice you of all your abominations,
Ezek. in that ye have brought in foreigners, uncircumcised in heart and uncircumcised in flesh, to be in my sanctuary, to profane it, even my house, when ye offer my bread, the fat and the blood. And they have broken my covenant, to add to all your abominations.
Ezek. And ye have not kept the charge of my holy things,  ye have set keepers of my charge in my sanctuary for yourselves.
Ezek. Thus says the lord Jehovah: No foreigner, uncircumcised in heart and uncircumcised in flesh, shall enter into my sanctuary, of any foreigners that are among the sons of Israel.
Ezek. But the Levites who went far from me, when Israel went astray, who went astray from me after their idols, they shall bear their iniquity.
Ezek. Yet they shall be ministers in my sanctuary, having oversight at the gates of the house,  ministering in the house. They shall kill the burnt offering and the sacrifice for the people,  they shall stand before them to minister to them.
Ezek. Because they ministered to them before their idols,  became a stumbling block of iniquity to the house of Israel, therefore I have lifted up my hand against them, says the lord Jehovah,  they shall bear their iniquity.
Ezek. And they shall not come near to me, to execute the office of priest to me, nor to come near to any of my holy things, to the things that are most holy,  they shall bear their shame,  their abominations which they have committed.
Ezek. Yet I will make them keepers of the charge of the house, for all the service of it,  for all that shall be done in it.
Ezek. But the priests the Levites, the sons of Zadok, who kept the charge of my sanctuary when the sons of Israel went astray from me, they shall come near to me to minister to me. And they shall stand before me to offer to me the fat and the blood, says the lord Jehovah:
Ezek. they shall enter into my sanctuary,  they shall come near to my table, to minister to me,  they shall keep my charge.
Ezek. And it shall be that, when they enter in at the gates of the inner court, they shall be clothed with linen garments,  no wool shall come upon them, while they minister in the gates of the inner court,  within.
Ezek. They shall have linen headdresses upon their heads,  shall have linen breeches upon their loins. They shall not gird themselves with anything that causes sweat.
Ezek. And when they go forth into the outer court, even into the outer court to the people, they shall put off their garments in which they minister,  lay them in the holy chambers. And they shall put on other garments, that they not sanctify the people with their garments.
Ezek. Neither shall they shave their heads, nor allow their locks to grow long. They shall only cut off the hair of their heads.
Ezek. Neither shall any of the priests drink wine when they enter into the inner court.
Ezek. Neither shall they take for their wives a widow, nor her who is put away,  they shall take virgins of the seed of the house of Israel, or a widow who is the widow of a priest.
Ezek. And they shall teach my people the difference between the holy and the common,  cause them to discern between the unclean and the clean.
Ezek. And in a controversy they shall stand to judge. They shall judge it according to my ordinances. And they shall keep my laws and my statutes in all my appointed feasts,  they shall hallow my sabbaths.
Ezek. And they shall go in to no dead person to defile themselves. But for father, or for mother, or for son, or for daughter, for brother, or for sister who has had no husband, they may defile themselves.
Ezek. And after he is cleansed, they shall reckon to him seven days.
Ezek. And in the day that he goes into the sanctuary, into the inner court, to minister in the sanctuary, he shall offer his sin offering, says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. And they shall have an inheritance: I am their inheritance. And ye shall give them no possession in Israel. I am their possession.
Ezek. They shall eat the meal offering,  the sin offering,  the trespass offering. And every devoted thing in Israel shall be theirs.
Ezek. And the first of all the first-fruits of every thing,  every oblation of everything, of all your oblations, shall be for the priest. Ye shall also give to the priests the first of your dough, to cause a blessing to rest on thy house.
Ezek. The priests shall not eat of anything that dies of itself, or is torn, whether it be bird or beast.
Ezek. Moreover, when ye shall divide the land by lot for inheritance, ye shall offer an oblation to Jehovah, a holy portion of the land. The length shall be the length of twenty-five thousand measures,  the breadth shall be ten thousand. It shall be holy in all the border of it round about.
Ezek. Of this there shall be for the holy place five hundred by five hundred square round about,  fifty cubits for the suburbs of it round about.
Ezek. And of this measure thou shall measure a length of twenty-five thousand,  a breadth of ten thousand. And the sanctuary shall be in it, which is most holy.
Ezek. It is a holy portion of the land. It shall be for the priests, the ministers of the sanctuary, who come near to minister to Jehovah,  it shall be a place for their houses,  a holy place for the sanctuary.
Ezek. And twenty-five thousand in length,  ten thousand in breadth, shall be to the Levites, the ministers of the house, for a possession to themselves, for twenty chambers.
Ezek. And ye shall appoint the possession of the city five thousand broad,  twenty-five thousand long, side by side with the oblation of the holy portion. It shall be for the whole house of Israel.
Ezek. And whatever is for the ruler shall be on the one side and on the other side of the holy oblation and of the possession of the city, in front of the holy oblation and in front of the possession of the city, on the west side westward,  on the east side eastward,  in length answerable to one of the portions, from the west border to the east border.
Ezek. It shall be to him for a possession in the land in Israel. And my rulers shall no more oppress my people,  they shall give the land to the house of Israel according to their tribes.
Ezek. Thus says the lord Jehovah: Let it suffice you, O rulers of Israel. Remove violence and spoil,  execute justice and righteousness. Take away your exactions from my people, says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. Ye shall have just balances,  a just ephah,  a just bath.
Ezek. The ephah and the bath shall be of one measure, that the bath may contain the tenth part of a homer,  the ephah the tenth part of a homer. The measure of it shall be according to the homer.
Ezek. And the shekel shall be twenty gerahs. Twenty shekels, twenty-five shekels, fifteen shekels, shall be your maneh.
Ezek. This is the oblation that ye shall offer: The sixth part of an ephah from a homer of wheat,  ye shall give the sixth part of an ephah from a homer of barley,
Ezek. and the set portion of oil, of the bath of oil, the tenth part of a bath out of the cor, which is ten baths, even a homer, (for ten baths are a homer),
Ezek. and one lamb of the flock, out of two hundred, from the well-watered pastures of Israel, for a meal offering,  for a burnt offering,  for peace offerings, to make atonement for them, says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. All the people of the land shall give to this oblation for the ruler in Israel.
Ezek. And it shall be the ruler's part to give the burnt offerings,  the meal offerings,  the drink offerings, in the feasts,  on the new moons,  on the sabbaths, in all the appointed feasts of the house of Israel. He shall prepare the sin offering,  the meal offering,  the burnt offering,  the peace offerings, to make atonement for the house of Israel.
Ezek. Thus says the lord Jehovah: In the first month, in the first day of the month, thou shall take a young bullock without blemish,  thou shall cleanse the sanctuary.
Ezek. And the priest shall take of the blood of the sin offering,  put it upon the door-posts of the house,  upon the four corners of the ledge of the altar,  upon the posts of the gate of the inner court.
Ezek. And so thou shall do on the seventh day of the month for each one who errs,  for him who is simple. So shall ye make atonement for the house.
Ezek. In the first month, in the fourteenth day of the month, ye shall have the Passover, a feast of seven days. Unleavened bread shall be eaten.
Ezek. And upon that day the ruler shall prepare for himself and for all the people of the land a bullock for a sin offering.
Ezek. And the seven days of the feast he shall prepare a burnt offering to Jehovah, seven bullocks and seven rams without blemish daily the seven days,  a he-goat daily for a sin offering.
Ezek. And he shall prepare a meal offering, an ephah for a bullock,  an ephah for a ram,  a hin of oil to an ephah.
Ezek. In the seventh month, in the fifteenth day of the month, in the feast, he shall do the like the seven days, according to the sin offering, according to the burnt offering,  according to the meal offering,  according to the oil.
Ezek. Thus says the lord Jehovah: The gate of the inner court that looks toward the east shall be shut the six working days,  on the sabbath day it shall be opened,  on the day of the new moon it shall be opened.
Ezek. And the ruler shall enter by the way of the porch of the gate outside,  shall stand by the post of the gate. And the priests shall prepare his burnt offering and his peace offerings,  he shall worship at the threshold of the gate. Then he shall go forth,  the gate shall not be shut until the evening.
Ezek. And the people of the land shall worship at the door of that gate before Jehovah on the sabbaths and on the new moons.
Ezek. And the burnt offering that the ruler shall offer to Jehovah shall be on the sabbath day six lambs without blemish and a ram without blemish,
Ezek. and the meal offering shall be an ephah for the ram,  the meal offering for the lambs as he is able to give,  a hin of oil to an ephah.
Ezek. And on the day of the new moon it shall be a young bullock without blemish,  six lambs,  a ram. They shall be without blemish.
Ezek. And he shall prepare a meal offering, an ephah for the bullock,  an ephah for the ram,  for the lambs according as he is able,  a hin of oil to an ephah.
Ezek. And when the ruler shall enter, he shall go in by the way of the porch of the gate,  he shall go forth by the way of it.
Ezek. But when the people of the land shall come before Jehovah in the appointed feasts, he who enters by the way of the north gate to worship shall go forth by the way of the south gate,  he who enters by the way of the south gate shall go forth by the way of the north gate. He shall not return by the way of the gate whereby he came in,  shall go forth straight before him.
Ezek. And the ruler, when they go in, shall go in in the midst of them,  when they go forth, they shall go forth together.
Ezek. And in the feasts and in the solemnities the meal offering shall be an ephah for a bullock,  an ephah for a ram,  for the lambs as he is able to give,  a hin of oil to an ephah.
Ezek. And when the ruler shall prepare a freewill offering, a burnt offering or peace offerings as a freewill offering to Jehovah, a man shall open for him the gate that looks toward the east. And he shall prepare his burnt offering and his peace offerings, as he does on the sabbath day. Then he shall go forth,  after his going forth a man shall shut the gate.
Ezek. And thou shall prepare a lamb a year old without blemish for a burnt offering to Jehovah daily. Thou shall prepare it morning by morning.
Ezek. And thou shall prepare a meal offering with it morning by morning, the sixth part of an ephah,  the third part of a hin of oil, to moisten the fine flour, a meal offering to Jehovah continually by a perpetual ordinance.
Ezek. Thus they shall prepare the lamb,  the meal offering,  the oil, morning by morning, for a continual burnt offering.
Ezek. Thus says the lord Jehovah: If the ruler gives a gift to any of his sons, it is his inheritance. It shall belong to his sons. It is their possession by inheritance.
Ezek. But if he gives a gift of his inheritance to one of his servants, it shall be his to the year of liberty, then it shall return to the ruler. But as for his inheritance, it shall be for his sons.
Ezek. Moreover the ruler shall not take of the people's inheritance, to thrust them out of their possession. He shall give inheritance to his sons out of his own possession, that my people be not scattered each man from his possession.
Ezek. Then he brought me through the entry, which was at the side of the gate, into the holy chambers for the priests, which looked toward the north. And, behold, there was a place on the rear part westward.
Ezek. And he said to me, This is the place where the priests shall boil the trespass offering and the sin offering,  where they shall bake the meal offering, that they not bring them forth into the outer court, to sanctify the people.
Ezek. Then he brought me forth into the outer court,  caused me to pass by the four corners of the court. And, behold, in every corner of the court there was a court.
Ezek. In the four corners of the court there were courts enclosed, forty long and thirty broad. These four in the corners were of one measure.
Ezek. And there was a wall round about in them, round about the four. And boiling-places were made under the walls round about.
Ezek. Then said he to me, These are the boiling-houses, where the ministers of the house shall boil the sacrifice of the people.
Ezek. And he brought me back to the door of the house. And, behold, waters issued out from under the threshold of the house eastward, for the forefront of the house was toward the east. And the waters came down from under, from the right side of the house, on the south of the altar.
Ezek. Then he brought me out by the way of the gate northward,  led me round by the way outside to the outer gate, by the way of the gate that looks toward the east. And, behold, waters ran out on the right side.
Ezek. When the man went forth eastward with the line in his hand, he measured a thousand cubits,  he caused me to pass through the waters, waters that were to the ankles.
Ezek. Again he measured a thousand,  caused me to pass through the waters, waters that were to the knees. Again he measured a thousand,  caused me to pass through the waters, waters that were to the loins.
Ezek. Afterward he measured a thousand,  it was a river that I could not pass through, for the waters were risen, waters to swim in, a river that could not be passed through.
Ezek. And he said to me, Son of man, have thou seen this? Then he brought me,  caused me to return to the bank of the river.
Ezek. Now when I had returned, behold, upon the bank of the river were very many trees on the one side and on the other.
Ezek. Then he said to me, These waters issue forth toward the eastern region,  shall go down into the Arabah. And they shall go toward the sea, into the sea which were made to issue forth,  the waters shall be healed.
Ezek. And it shall come to pass, that every living creature which swarms, in every place where the rivers come, shall live. And there shall be a very great multitude of fish (for these waters have come there) and shall be healed. And everything shall live wherever the river comes.
Ezek. And it shall come to pass, that fishermen shall stand by it. From En-gedi even to En-eglaim shall be a place for the spreading of nets. Their fish shall be according to their kinds, as the fish of the great sea, very many.
Ezek. But the miry places of it,  the marshes of it, shall not be healed. They shall be given up to salt.
Ezek. And by the river upon the bank of it, on this side and on that side, shall grow every tree for food, whose leaf shall not wither, nor shall the fruit of it fail. It shall bring forth new fruit every month, because the waters of it issue out of the sanctuary. And the fruit of it shall be for food,  the leaf of it for healing.
Ezek. Thus says the lord Jehovah: This shall be the border by which ye shall divide the land for inheritance according to the twelve tribes of Israel. Joseph shall have two portions.
Ezek. And ye shall inherit it, one as well as another, for I swore to give it to your fathers. And this land shall fall to you for inheritance.
Ezek. And this shall be the border of the land: On the north side, from the great sea, by the way of Hethlon, to the entrance of Zedad,
Ezek. Hamath, Berothah, Sibraim, which is between the border of Damascus and the border of Hamath, Hazer-hatticon, which is by the border of Hauran.
Ezek. And the border from the sea, shall be Hazar-enon at the border of Damascus,  on the north northward is the border of Hamath. This is the north side.
Ezek. And the east side, between Hauran and Damascus and Gilead,  the land of Israel, shall be the Jordan, from the north border to the east sea ye shall measure. This is the east side.
Ezek. And the south side southward shall be from Tamar as far as the waters of Meriboth-kadesh, to the brook of Egypt, to the great sea. This is the south side southward.
Ezek. And the west side shall be the great sea, from the south border as far as opposite the entrance of Hamath. This is the west side.
Ezek. So ye shall divide this land to you according to the tribes of Israel.
Ezek. And it shall come to pass, that ye shall divide it by lot for an inheritance to you and to the strangers who sojourn among you, who shall beget sons among you. And they shall be to you as the home-born among the sons of Israel; they shall have inheritance with you among the tribes of Israel.
Ezek. And it shall come to pass, that in what tribe the stranger sojourns, there ye shall give him his inheritance, says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. Now these are the names of the tribes: From the north end, beside the way of Hethlon to the entrance of Hamath, Hazar-enan at the border of Damascus, northward beside Hamath, (and they shall have their sides east and west), Dan, one portion.
Ezek. And by the border of Dan, from the east side to the west side, Asher, one portion.
Ezek. And by the border of Asher, from the east side even to the west side, Naphtali, one portion.
Ezek. And by the border of Naphtali, from the east side to the west side, Manasseh, one portion.
Ezek. And by the border of Manasseh, from the east side to the west side, Ephraim, one portion.
Ezek. And by the border of Ephraim, from the east side even to the west side, Reuben, one portion.
Ezek. And by the border of Reuben, from the east side to the west side, Judah, one portion.
Ezek. And by the border of Judah, from the east side to the west side, shall be the oblation which ye shall offer: twenty-five thousand measures in breadth,  in length as one of the portions, from the east side to the west side. And the sanctuary shall be in the midst of it.
Ezek. The oblation that ye shall offer to Jehovah shall be twenty-five thousand measures in length,  ten thousand in breadth.
Ezek. And for these, even for the priests, shall be the holy oblation: toward the north twenty-five thousand in length,  toward the west ten thousand in breadth,  toward the east ten thousand in breadth,  toward the south twenty-five thousand in length. And the sanctuary of Jehovah shall be in the midst of it.
Ezek. It shall be for the priests who are sanctified of the sons of Zadok, who have kept my charge, who did not go astray when the sons of Israel went astray, as the Levites went astray.
Ezek. And it shall be to them an oblation from the oblation of the land, a thing most holy, by the border of the Levites.
Ezek. And answerable to the border of the priests, the Levites shall have twenty-five thousand in length,  ten thousand in breadth. All the length shall be twenty-five thousand,  the breadth ten thousand.
Ezek. And they shall sell none of it, nor exchange it, nor shall the first-fruits of the land be alienated, for it is holy to Jehovah.
Ezek. And the five thousand that are left in the breadth, in front of the twenty-five thousand, shall be for common use, for the city, for dwelling and for suburbs. And the city shall be in the midst of it.
Ezek. And these shall be the measures of it: the north side four thousand and five hundred,  the south side four thousand and five hundred,  on the east side four thousand and five hundred,  the west side four thousand and five hundred.
Ezek. And the city shall have suburbs: toward the north two hundred and fifty,  toward the south two hundred and fifty,  toward the east two hundred and fifty,  toward the west two hundred and fifty.
Ezek. And the residue in the length, answerable to the holy oblation, shall be ten thousand eastward,  ten thousand westward. And it shall be answerable to the holy oblation. And the increase of it shall be for food to those who labor in the city.
Ezek. And those who labor in the city, out of all the tribes of Israel, shall till it.
Ezek. All the oblation shall be twenty-five thousand by twenty-five thousand. Ye shall offer the holy oblation four-square, with the possession of the city.
Ezek. And the residue shall be for the ruler, on the one side and on the other of the holy oblation and of the possession of the city, in front of the twenty-five thousand of the oblation toward the east border,  westward in front of the twenty-five thousand toward the west border, answerable to the portions. It shall be for the ruler. And the holy oblation and the sanctuary of the house shall be in the midst of it.
Ezek. Moreover from the possession of the Levites,  from the possession of the city, being in the midst of that which is the ruler's, between the border of Judah and the border of Benjamin, it shall be for the ruler.
Ezek. And as for the rest of the tribes, from the east side to the west side, Benjamin, one portion.
Ezek. And by the border of Benjamin, from the east side to the west side, Simeon, one portion.
Ezek. And by the border of Simeon, from the east side to the west side, Issachar, one portion.
Ezek. And by the border of Issachar, from the east side to the west side, Zebulun, one portion.
Ezek. And by the border of Zebulun, from the east side to the west side, Gad, one portion.
Ezek. And by the border of Gad, at the south side southward, the border shall be even from Tamar to the waters of Meribath-kadesh, to the brook of Egypt, to the great sea.
Ezek. This is the land which ye shall divide by lot to the tribes of Israel for inheritance,  these are their several portions, says the lord Jehovah.
Ezek. And these are the exits of the city: On the north side four thousand and five hundred measures by measure.
Ezek. And the gates of the city shall be according to the names of the tribes of Israel, three gates northward: the gate of Reuben, one, the gate of Judah, one, the gate of Levi, one.
Ezek. And at the east side four thousand and five hundred measures,  three gates: even the gate of Joseph, one, the gate of Benjamin, one, the gate of Dan, one.
Ezek. And at the south side four thousand and five hundred measures by measure,  three gates: the gate of Simeon, one, the gate of Issachar, one, the gate of Zebulun, one.
Ezek. At the west side four thousand and five hundred measures, with their three gates: the gate of Gad, one, the gate of Asher, one, the gate of Naphtali, one.
Ezek. It shall be eighteen thousand measures round about. And the name of the city from that day shall be, Jehovah is there.
Daniel
In the third year of the reign of Jehoiakim king of Judah, Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came to Jerusalem,  besieged it.
the Lord gave Jehoiakim king of Judah into his hand, with part of the vessels of the house of God. And he carried them into the land of Shinar to the house of his god,  he brought the vessels into the treasure-house of his god.
the king spoke to Ashpenaz the master of his eunuchs, that he should bring in certain of the sons of Israel, even of the seed royal and of the ranking men,
youths in whom was no blemish,  well-favored,  skilful in all wisdom,  endued with knowledge,  understanding science,  such as had ability to stand in the king's palace. And that he should teach them the learning and the tongue of the Chaldeans.
the king appointed for them a daily portion of the king's food,  of the wine which he drank. And that they should be nourished three years, that at the end of it they should stand before the king.
Now among these were, of the sons of Judah: Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael,  Azariah.
the ruler of the eunuchs gave names to them. To Daniel he gave the name of Belteshazzar,  to Hananiah, of Shadrach,  to Mishael, of Meshach,  to Azariah, of Abednego.
But Daniel purposed in his heart that he would not defile himself with the king's food, nor with the wine which he drank. Therefore he requested of the ruler of the eunuchs that he might not defile himself.
Now God made Daniel find kindness and compassion in the sight of the ruler of the eunuchs.
the ruler of the eunuchs said to Daniel, I fear my lord the king, who has appointed your food and your drink. For why should he see your faces worse looking than the youths that are of your own age? So ye would endanger my head with the king.
Then Daniel said to the steward whom the ruler of the eunuchs had appointed over Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael,  Azariah,
Test thy servants, I beseech thee, ten days,  let them give us vegetables to eat,  water to drink.
Then let our countenances be looked upon before thee,  the countenance of the youths that eat of the king's food. And as thou see, deal with thy servants.
So he hearkened to them in this matter,  tested them ten days.
at the end of ten days their countenances appeared finer,  they were fuller in flesh, than all the youths who ate of the king's dainties.
So the steward took away their food,  the wine that they should drink,  gave them vegetables.
Now as for these four youths, God gave them knowledge and skill in all learning and wisdom. And Daniel had understanding in all visions and dreams.
at the end of the days which the king had appointed for bringing them in, the ruler of the eunuchs brought them in before Nebuchadnezzar.
the king conversed with them. And among them all none was found like Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael,  Azariah. Therefore they stood before the king.
in every matter of wisdom and understanding, concerning which the king inquired of them, he found them ten times better than all the magicians and enchanters who were in all his realm.
Daniel continued even to the first year of king Cyrus.
in the second year of the reign of Nebuchadnezzar, Nebuchadnezzar dreamed dreams. And his spirit was troubled,  his sleep went from him.
Then the king commanded to call the magicians,  the enchanters,  the sorcerers,  the Chaldeans, to tell the king his dreams. So they came in and stood before the king.
the king said to them, I have dreamed a dream,  my spirit is troubled to know the dream.
Then the Chaldeans spoke to the king in the Syrian language, O king, live forever. Tell thy servants the dream,  we will show the interpretation.
The king answered and said to the Chaldeans, The thing is gone from me. If ye do not make the dream and the interpretation of it known to me, ye shall be cut in pieces,  your houses shall be made a dunghill.
But if ye show the dream and the interpretation of it, ye shall receive gifts and rewards and great honor from me. Therefore show the dream and the interpretation of it to me.
They answered the second time and said, Let the king tell his servants the dream,  we will show the interpretation.
The king answered and said, I know of a certainty that ye would gain time, because ye see the thing has gone from me.
But if ye do not make known to me the dream, there is but one law for you, for ye have prepared lying and corrupt words to speak before me till the time is changed. Therefore tell me the dream,  I shall know that ye can show me the interpretation of it.
The Chaldeans answered before the king,  said, There is not a man upon the earth who can show the king's matter. Inasmuch as no king, lord, or ruler, has asked such a thing of any magician or enchanter or Chaldean.
it is a rare thing that the king requires,  there is no other who can show it before the king, except the gods, whose dwelling is not with flesh.
For this reason the king was angry and very furious,  commanded to destroy all the wise men of Babylon.
So the decree went forth,  the wise men were to be slain. And they sought Daniel and his companions to be slain.
Then Daniel returned answer with counsel and prudence to Arioch, the captain of the king's guard, who went forth to kill the wise men of Babylon.
He answered and said to Arioch the king's captain, Why is the decree so urgent from the king? Then Arioch made the thing known to Daniel.
Daniel went in,  desired of the king that he would appoint him a time,  he would show the king the interpretation.
Then Daniel went to his house,  made the thing known to Hananiah, Mishael,  Azariah, his companions,
that they would desire mercies of the God of heaven concerning this secret, that Daniel and his companions should nor perish with the rest of the wise men of Babylon.
Then the secret was shown to Daniel in a vision of the night. Then Daniel blessed the God of heaven.
Daniel answered and said, Blessed be the name of God forever and ever, for wisdom and might are his.
he changes the times and the seasons. He removes kings,  sets up kings. He gives wisdom to the wise,  knowledge to those who have understanding.
He reveals the deep and secret things. He knows what is in the darkness,  the light dwells with him.
I thank thee,  praise thee, O thou God of my fathers, who has given me wisdom and might,  has now made known to me what we desired of thee, for thou have made known to us the king's matter.
Therefore Daniel went in to Arioch, whom the king had appointed to destroy the wise men of Babylon. He went and said thus to him: Do not destroy the wise men of Babylon. Bring me in before the king,  I will show to the king the interpretation.
Then Arioch brought Daniel in before the king in haste,  said thus to him: I have found a man of the sons of the captivity of Judah, who will make known the interpretation to the king.
The king answered and said to Daniel, whose name was Belteshazzar, Are thou able to make known to me the dream which I have seen,  the interpretation of it?
Daniel answered before the king,  said, The secret which the king has demanded, neither wise men, enchanters, magicians, nor soothsayers, can show to the king,
but there is a God in heaven who reveals secrets. And he has made known to the king Nebuchadnezzar what shall be in the latter days. Thy dream,  the visions of thy head upon thy bed, are these:
As for thee, O king, thy thoughts came upon thy bed, what should come to pass hereafter. And he who reveals secrets has made known to thee what shall come to pass.
But as for me, this secret is not revealed to me for any wisdom that I have more than any living man,  to the intent that the interpretation may be made known to the king,  that thou may know the thoughts of thy heart.
Thou, O king, saw, , behold, a great image. This image, which was mighty,  whose brightness was excellent, stood before thee,  the appearance of it was fearful.
As for this image, its head was of fine gold, its breast and its arms of silver, its belly and its thighs of brass,
its legs of iron, its feet part of iron,  part of clay.
Thou looked until a stone was cut out without hands, which smote the image upon its feet that were of iron and clay,  broke them in pieces.
Then the iron, the clay, the brass, the silver,  the gold, was broken in pieces together,  became like the chaff of the summer threshing floors. And the wind carried them away, so that no place was found for them. And the stone that smote the image became a great mountain,  filled the whole earth.
This is the dream,  we will tell the interpretation of it before the king.
Thou, O king, are a king of kings, to whom the God of heaven has given the kingdom, the power,  the strength,  the glory.
wherever the sons of men dwell, the beasts of the field and the birds of the heavens, he has given into thy hand,  has made thee to rule over them all. Thou are the head of gold.
after thee shall arise another kingdom inferior to thee,  another third kingdom of brass, which shall bear rule over all the earth.
the fourth kingdom shall be strong as iron, inasmuch as iron breaks in pieces and subdues all things. And as iron that crushes all these, it shall break in pieces and crush.
whereas thou saw the feet and toes, part of potters' clay,  part of iron, it shall be a divided kingdom. But there shall be of the strength of the iron in it, inasmuch as thou saw the iron mixed with miry clay.
as the toes of the feet were part of iron,  part of clay, so the kingdom shall be partly strong,  partly broken.
whereas thou saw the iron mixed with miry clay, they shall mingle themselves with the seed of men,  they shall not cling one to another, even as iron does not mix with clay.
in the days of those kings the God of heaven shall set up a kingdom that shall never be destroyed, nor shall the sovereignty of it be left to another people,  it shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms,  it shall stand forever.
Inasmuch as thou saw that a stone was cut out of the mountain without hands,  that it broke in pieces the iron, the brass, the clay, the silver,  the gold, the great God has made known to the king what shall come to pass hereafter. And the dream is certain,  the interpretation thereof sure.
Then the king Nebuchadnezzar fell upon his face,  worshiped Daniel,  commanded that they should offer an oblation and sweet odors to him.
The king answered to Daniel,  said, Of a truth your God is the God of gods,  Lord of kings,  a revealer of secrets, since thou have been able to reveal this secret.
Then the king made Daniel great,  gave him many great gifts,  made him to rule over the whole province of Babylon,  to be chief governor over all the wise men of Babylon.
Daniel requested of the king,  he appointed Shadrach, Meshach,  Abednego, over the affairs of the province of Babylon,  Daniel was in the gate of the king.
Nebuchadnezzar the king made an image of gold, whose height was sixty cubits,  the breadth of it six cubits. He set it up in the plain of Dura, in the province of Babylon.
Then Nebuchadnezzar the king sent to gather together the satraps, the deputies,  the governors, the judges, the treasurers, the counselors, the sheriffs,  all the rulers of the provinces, to come to the dedication of the image which Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up.
Then the satraps, the deputies,  the governors, the judges, the treasurers, the counselors, the sheriffs,  all the rulers of the provinces, were gathered together to the dedication of the image that Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up,  they stood before the image that Nebuchadnezzar had set up.
Then the herald cried aloud, To you it is commanded, O peoples, nations,  languages,
that at what time ye hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, dulcimer,  all kinds of music, ye fall down and worship the golden image that Nebuchadnezzar the king has set up.
he who does not fall down and worship shall the same hour be cast into the midst of a burning fiery furnace.
Therefore at that time, when all the peoples heard the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery,  all kinds of music, all the peoples, the nations,  the languages, fell down and worshiped the golden image that Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up.
Therefore at that time certain Chaldeans came near,  brought accusation against the Jews.
They answered and said to Nebuchadnezzar the king, O king, live forever.
Thou, O king, have made a decree, that every man who shall hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery,  dulcimer,  all kinds of music, shall fall down and worship the golden image.
he who does not fall down and worship, shall be cast into the midst of a burning fiery furnace.
There are certain Jews whom thou have appointed over the affairs of the province of Babylon: Shadrach, Meshach,  Abednego. These men, O king, have not regarded thee. They do not serve thy gods, nor worship the golden image which thou have set up.
Then Nebuchadnezzar in his rage and fury commanded to bring Shadrach, Meshach,  Abednego. Then they brought these men before the king.
Nebuchadnezzar answered and said to them, Is it of purpose, O Shadrach, Meshach,  Abednego, that ye do not serve my god, nor worship the golden image which I have set up?
Now if ye be ready that at what time ye hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery,  dulcimer,  all kinds of music, ye fall down and worship the image which I have made, well. But if ye do not worship, ye shall be cast the same hour into the midst of a burning fiery furnace. And who is that god who shall deliver you out of my hands?
Shadrach, Meshach,  Abednego answered and said to the king, O Nebuchadnezzar, we have no need to answer thee in this matter.
If it be so, our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the burning fiery furnace,  he will deliver us out of thy hand, O king.
But if not, be it known to thee, O king, that we will not serve thy gods, nor worship the golden image which thou have set up.
Then Nebuchadnezzar was full of fury,  the form of his visage was changed against Shadrach, Meshach,  Abednego. Therefore he spoke,  commanded that they should heat the furnace seven times more than it was accustomed to be heated.
he commanded certain mighty men who were in his army to bind Shadrach, Meshach,  Abednego,  to cast them into the burning fiery furnace.
Then these men were bound in their coats, their tunics,  their head coverings,  their other garments,  were cast into the midst of the burning fiery furnace.
Therefore because the king's commandment was urgent,  the furnace very hot, the flame of the fire killed those men who took up Shadrach, Meshach,  Abednego.
these three men, Shadrach, Meshach,  Abednego, fell down bound into the midst of the burning fiery furnace.
Then Nebuchadnezzar the king was astonished,  rose up in haste. He spoke and said to his counselors, Did we not cast three men bound into the midst of the fire? They answered and said to the king, True, O king.
He answered and said, Lo, I see four men loose, walking in the midst of the fire,  they have no harm. And the appearance of the fourth is like a son of the gods.
Then Nebuchadnezzar came near to the mouth of the burning fiery furnace. He spoke and said, Shadrach, Meshach,  Abednego, ye servants of the Most High God, come forth,  come here. Then Shadrach, Meshach,  Abednego came forth out of the midst of the fire.
the satraps, the deputies,  the governors,  the king's counselors, being gathered together, saw these men, that the fire had no power upon their bodies, nor was the hair of their head singed. Neither were their coats changed, nor had the smell of fire passed on them.
Nebuchadnezzar spoke and said, Blessed be the God of Shadrach, Meshach,  Abednego, who has sent his agent,  delivered his servants who trusted in him,  have changed the king's word,  have yielded their bodies, that they might not serve nor worship any god, except their own God.
Therefore I make a decree, that every people, nation,  language, which speaks anything amiss against the God of Shadrach, Meshach,  Abednego, shall be cut in pieces,  their houses shall be made a dunghill, because there is no other god who is able to deliver after this sort.
Then the king promoted Shadrach, Meshach,  Abednego in the province of Babylon.
Nebuchadnezzar the king, to all the peoples, nations,  languages, who dwell in all the earth: Peace be multiplied to you.
It has seemed good to me to show the signs and wonders that the Most High God has wrought toward me.
How great are his signs,  how mighty are his wonders! His kingdom is an everlasting kingdom,  his dominion is from generation to generation.
I, Nebuchadnezzar, was at rest in my house,  flourishing in my palace.
I saw a dream which made me afraid,  the thoughts upon my bed and the visions of my head troubled me.
Therefore I made a decree to bring in all the wise men of Babylon before me, that they might make known to me the interpretation of the dream.
Then the magicians, the enchanters, the Chaldeans,  the soothsayers came in,  I told the dream before them,  they did not make the interpretation of it known to me.
But at the last Daniel came in before me, whose name was Belteshazzar, according to the name of my god,  in whom is the spirit of the holy gods. And I told the dream before him, saying,
O Belteshazzar, master of the magicians, because I know that the spirit of the holy gods is in thee,  no secret troubles thee, tell me the visions of my dream that I have seen,  the interpretation thereof.
Thus were the visions of my head upon my bed: I saw, , behold, a tree in the midst of the earth,  the height of it was great.
The tree grew,  was strong,  the height of it reached to heaven,  the sight of it to the end of all the earth.
The leaves of it were fine,  the fruit of it much,  food was in it for all. The beasts of the field had shadow under it,  the birds of the heavens dwelt in the branches of it. And all flesh was fed from it.
I saw in the visions of my head upon my bed, , behold, a watcher and a holy one came down from heaven.
He cried aloud,  said thus, Hew down the tree,  cut off its branches. Shake off its leaves,  scatter its fruit. Let the beasts get away from under it,  the fowls from its branches.
Nevertheless leave the stump of its roots in the earth, even with a band of iron and brass, in the tender grass of the field. And let it be wet with the dew of heaven,  let his portion be with the beasts in the grass of the earth.
Let his heart be changed from man's,  let a beast's heart be given to him. And let seven times pass over him.
The sentence is by the decree of the watchers,  the demand by the word of the holy ones, to the intent that the living may know that the Most High rules in the kingdom of men,  gives it to whomever he will,  sets up over it the lowest of men.
This dream I, king Nebuchadnezzar, have seen. And thou, O Belteshazzar, declare the interpretation, inasmuch as all the wise men of my kingdom are not able to make known to me the interpretation. But thou are able, for the spirit of the holy gods is in thee.
Then Daniel, whose name was Belteshazzar, was stricken mute for a while,  his thoughts troubled him. The king answered and said, Belteshazzar, let not the dream, or the interpretation, trouble thee. Belteshazzar answered and said, My lord, may the dream be to those who hate thee,  the interpretation of it to thine adversaries.
The tree that thou saw, which grew,  was strong, whose height reached to heaven,  the sight of it to all the earth,
whose leaves were fine,  the fruit of it much,  in it was food for all, under which the beasts of the field dwelt,  upon whose branches the birds of the heavens had their habitation,
it is thou, O king, who have grown and become strong. For thy greatness has grown,  reaches to heaven,  thy dominion to the end of the earth.
whereas the king saw a watcher and a holy one coming down from heaven,  saying, Hew down the tree,  destroy it. Nevertheless leave the stump of the roots of it in the earth, even with a band of iron and brass, in the tender grass of the field. And let it be wet with the dew of heaven,  let his portion be with the beasts of the field, till seven times pass over him;
this is the interpretation, O king,  it is the decree of the Most High, which has come upon my lord the king:
That thou shall be driven from men,  thy dwelling shall be with the beasts of the field. And thou shall be made to eat grass as oxen,  shall be wet with the dew of heaven. And seven times shall pass over thee till thou know that the Most High rules in the kingdom of men,  gives it to whomever he will.
whereas they commanded to leave the stump of the roots of the tree, thy kingdom shall be sure to thee, after thou shall have known that the heavens do rule.
Therefore, O king, let my counsel be acceptable to thee,  break off thy sins by righteousness,  thine iniquities by showing mercy to the poor, if there may be a lengthening of thy tranquility.
All this came upon the king Nebuchadnezzar.
At the end of twelve months he was walking in the royal palace of Babylon.
The king spoke and said, Is not this great Babylon, which I have built for the royal dwelling-place by the might of my power and for the glory of my majesty?
While the word was in the king's mouth, a voice from heaven fell, saying, O king Nebuchadnezzar, to thee it is spoken: The kingdom is departed from thee.
thou shall be driven from men,  thy dwelling shall be with the beasts of the field. Thou shall be made to eat grass as oxen,  seven times shall pass over thee, until thou know that the Most High rules in the kingdom of men,  gives it to whomever he will.
The same hour the thing was fulfilled upon Nebuchadnezzar. And he was driven from men,  ate grass as oxen. And his body was wet with the dew of heaven, till his hair was grown like eagles' feathers,  his nails like birds' claws.
at the end of the days I, Nebuchadnezzar, lifted up my eyes to heaven,  my understanding returned to me. And I blessed the Most High,  I praised and honored him who lives forever. For his dominion is an everlasting dominion,  his kingdom from generation to generation.
all the inhabitants of the earth are reputed as nothing,  he does according to his will in the army of heaven,  among the inhabitants of the earth. And none can stay his hand, or say to him, What are thou doing?
At the same time my understanding returned to me,  for the glory of my kingdom, my majesty and brightness returned to me,  my counselors and my lords sought to me. And I was established in my kingdom,  excellent greatness was added to me.
Now I, Nebuchadnezzar, praise and extol and honor the King of heaven, for all his works are truth,  his ways justice. And he is able to abase those who walk in pride.
Belshazzar the king made a great feast for a thousand of his lords,  drank wine before the thousand.
Belshazzar, while he tasted the wine, commanded to bring the golden and silver vessels which Nebuchadnezzar his father had taken out of the temple which was in Jerusalem, that the king and his lords, his wives and his concubines, might drink from there.
Then they brought the golden vessels that were taken out of the temple of the house of God which was at Jerusalem. And the king and his lords, his wives and his concubines, drank from them.
They drank wine,  praised the gods of gold,  of silver, of brass, of iron, of wood,  of stone.
In the same hour the fingers of a man's hand came forth,  wrote opposite the lampstand upon the plaster of the wall of the king's palace. And the king saw the part of the hand that wrote.
Then the king's countenance was changed in him,  his thoughts troubled him. And the joints of his loins were loosed,  his knees smote one against another.
The king cried aloud to bring in the enchanters, the Chaldeans,  the soothsayers. The king spoke and said to the wise men of Babylon, Whoever shall read this writing,  show me the interpretation of it, shall be clothed with purple,  have a chain of gold about his neck,  shall be the third ruler in the kingdom.
Then all the king's wise men came in,  they could not read the writing, nor make known to the king the interpretation.
Then king Belshazzar was greatly troubled,  his countenance was changed in him,  his lords were perplexed.
Now the queen came into the banquet house because of the words of the king and his lords. The queen spoke and said, O king, live forever. Let not thy thoughts trouble thee, nor let thy countenance be changed.
There is a man in thy kingdom, in whom is the spirit of the holy gods. And in the days of thy father light and understanding and wisdom, like the wisdom of the gods, were found in him. And the king Nebuchadnezzar thy father, the king, I say, thy father, made him master of the magicians, enchanters, Chaldeans,  soothsayers,
inasmuch as an excellent spirit,  knowledge,  understanding, interpreting of dreams,  showing of dark sentences,  dissolving of doubts, were found in the same Daniel, whom the king named Belteshazzar. Now let Daniel be called,  he will show the interpretation.
Then Daniel was brought in before the king. The king spoke and said to Daniel, Are thou that Daniel, who are of the sons of the captivity of Judah, whom my father the king brought out of Judah?
I have heard of thee, that the spirit of the gods is in thee,  that light and understanding and excellent wisdom are found in thee.
now the wise men, the enchanters, have been brought in before me, that they should read this writing,  make known to me the interpretation of it,  they could not show the interpretation of the thing.
But I have heard of thee, that thou can give interpretations,  dissolve doubts. Now if thou can read the writing,  make known to me the interpretation of it, thou shall be clothed with purple,  have a chain of gold about thy neck,  shall be the third ruler in the kingdom.
Then Daniel answered and said before the king, Let thy gifts be to thyself,  give thy rewards to another. Nevertheless I will read the writing to the king,  make known to him the interpretation.
O thou king, the Most High God gave Nebuchadnezzar thy father the kingdom and greatness and glory and majesty.
because of the greatness that he gave him, all the peoples, nations,  languages trembled and feared before him. Whom he wanted, he killed,  whom he wanted, he kept alive,  whom he wanted, he raised up,  whom he wanted, he put down.
But when his heart was lifted up,  his spirit was hardened so that he dealt proudly, he was deposed from his kingly throne. And they took his glory from him,
he was driven from the sons of men. And his heart was made like the beasts,  his dwelling was with the wild donkeys. He was fed with grass like oxen,  his body was wet with the dew of heaven, until he knew that the Most High God rules in the kingdom of men,  that he sets up over it whomever he will.
thou his son, O Belshazzar, have not humbled thy heart, though thou knew all this,
but have lifted up thyself against the Lord of heaven. And they have brought the vessels of his house before thee,  thou and thy lords, thy wives and thy concubines, have drunk wine from them. And thou have praised the gods of silver and gold, of brass, iron, wood,  stone, which neither see, nor hear, nor know. And the God in whose hand thy breath is,  whose are all thy ways, thou have not glorified.
Then the part of the hand was sent from before him,  this writing was inscribed.
this is the writing that was inscribed: MENE, MENE, TEKEL, UPHARSIN.
This is the interpretation of the thing: MENE, God has numbered thy kingdom,  brought it to an end.
TEKEL, thou are weighed in the balances,  are found wanting.
PERES, thy kingdom is divided,  given to the Medes and Persians.
Then Belshazzar commanded,  they clothed Daniel with purple,  put a chain of gold about his neck,  made proclamation concerning him, that he should be the third ruler in the kingdom.
In that night Belshazzar the Chaldean King was slain.
Darius the Mede received the kingdom, being about sixty-two years old.
It pleased Darius to set over the kingdom a hundred and twenty satraps, who should be throughout the whole kingdom,
over them three presidents, of whom Daniel was one, that these satraps might give account to them,  that the king should have no damage.
Then this Daniel was distinguished above the presidents and the satraps, because an excellent spirit was in him,  the king thought to set him over the whole realm.
Then the presidents and the satraps sought to find occasion against Daniel concerning the kingdom,  they could find no occasion nor fault, inasmuch as he was faithful, nor was there any error or fault found in him.
Then these men said, We shall not find any occasion against this Daniel unless we find it against him concerning the law of his God.
Then these presidents and satraps assembled together to the king,  said thus to him: King Darius, live forever.
All the presidents of the kingdom, the deputies and the satraps, the counselors and the governors, have consulted together to establish a royal statute,  to make a strong interdict, that whoever shall ask a petition of any god or man for thirty days, except of thee, O king, he shall be cast into the den of lions.
Now, O king, establish the interdict,  sign the writing, that it be not changed, according to the law of the Medes and Persians, which does not alter.
Therefore king Darius signed the writing and the interdict.
when Daniel knew that the writing was signed, he went into his house (now his windows were open in his chamber toward Jerusalem) and he knelt upon his knees three times a day,  prayed,  gave thanks before his God, as he did formerly.
Then these men assembled together,  found Daniel making petition and supplication before his God.
Then they came near,  spoke before the king concerning the king's interdict. Have thou not signed an interdict, that every man who shall make petition to any god or man within thirty days, except to thee, O king, shall be cast into the den of lions? The king answered and said, The thing is true according to the law of the Medes and Persians, which does not alter.
Then they answered and said before the king, That Daniel, who is of the sons of the captivity of Judah, does not regard thee, O king, nor the interdict that thou have signed,  makes his petition three times a day.
Then the king, when he heard these words, was very displeased,  set his heart on Daniel to deliver him. And he labored till the going down of the sun to rescue him.
Then these men assembled together to the king,  said to the king, Know, O king, that it is a law of the Medes and Persians, that no interdict nor statute which the king establishes may be changed.
Then the king commanded,  they brought Daniel,  cast him into the den of lions. Now the king spoke and said to Daniel, Thy God whom thou serve continually, he will deliver thee.
a stone was brought,  laid upon the mouth of the den. And the king sealed it with his own signet,  with the signet of his lords, that nothing might be changed concerning Daniel.
Then the king went to his palace,  passed the night fasting, nor were instruments of music brought before him. And his sleep fled from him.
Then the king arose very early in the morning,  went in haste to the den of lions.
when he came near to the den to Daniel, he cried with a lamentable voice. The king spoke and said to Daniel, O Daniel, servant of the living God, is thy God, whom thou serve continually, able to deliver thee from the lions?
Then Daniel said to the king, O king, live forever.
My God has sent his agent,  has shut the lions' mouths,  they have not hurt me, inasmuch as before him innocence was found in me. And also before thee, O king, I have done no harm.
Then the king was exceedingly glad,  commanded that they should take Daniel up out of the den. So Daniel was taken up out of the den,  no manner of harm was found upon him, because he had trusted in his God.
the king commanded,  they brought those men who had accused Daniel,  they cast them into the den of lions, them, their sons,  their wives. And the lions had the mastery of them,  broke all their bones in pieces, before they came to the bottom of the den.
Then king Darius wrote to all the peoples, nations,  languages, who dwell in all the earth: Peace be multiplied to you.
I make a decree, that in all the dominion of my kingdom men tremble and fear before the God of Daniel, for he is the living God,  steadfast forever. And his kingdom is that which shall not be destroyed,  his dominion shall be even to the end.
He delivers and rescues,  he works signs and wonders in heaven and in earth, who has delivered Daniel from the power of the lions.
So this Daniel prospered in the reign of Darius,  in the reign of Cyrus the Persian.
In the first year of Belshazzar king of Babylon, Daniel had a dream and visions of his head upon his bed. Then he wrote the dream and told the sum of the matters.
Daniel spoke and said, I saw in my vision by night, , behold, the four winds of heaven broke forth upon the great sea.
four great beasts came up from the sea, different one from another.
The first was like a lion,  had eagle's wings. I beheld till the wings of it were plucked,  it was lifted up from the earth,  made to stand upon two feet as a man,  a man's heart was given to it.
And, behold, another beast, a second, like a bear,  it was raised up on one side,  three ribs were in its mouth between its teeth. And they said thus to it: Arise, devour much flesh.
After this I beheld, , lo, another, like a leopard, which had upon its back four wings of a bird. The beast also had four heads,  dominion was given to it.
After this I saw in the night visions, , behold, a fourth beast, fearful and powerful,  exceedingly strong. And it had great iron teeth. It devoured and broke in pieces,  stamped the residue with its feet. And it was different from all the beasts that were before it,  it had ten horns.
I considered the horns, , behold, there came up among them another horn, a little one, before which three of the first horns were plucked up by the roots. And, behold, in this horn were eyes like the eyes of a man,  a mouth speaking great things.
I beheld till thrones were placed,  one who was ancient of days sat. His raiment was white as snow,  the hair of his head like pure wool. His throne was fiery flames,  the wheels of it burning fire.
A fiery stream issued and came forth from before him. Thousands of thousands ministered to him,  ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him. The judgment was set,  the books were opened.
I beheld at that time because of the voice of the great words which the horn spoke. I beheld even till the beast was slain,  its body destroyed,  it was given to be burned with fire.
as for the rest of the beasts, their dominion was taken away. Yet their lives were prolonged for a season and a time.
I saw in the night visions, , behold, there came with the clouds of heaven someone like a son of man. And he came even to the ancient of days,  they brought him near before him.
there was given him dominion,  glory,  a kingdom, that all the peoples, nations,  languages should serve him. His dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away,  his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed.
As for me, Daniel, my spirit was grieved in the midst of my body,  the visions of my head troubled me.
I came near to one of those who stood by,  asked him the truth concerning all this. So he told me,  made me know the interpretation of the things.
These great beasts, which are four, are four kings who shall arise out of the earth.
But the sanctified of the Most High shall receive the kingdom,  possess the kingdom forever, even forever and ever.
Then I desired to know the truth concerning the fourth beast, which was different from all of them, exceedingly fearful, whose teeth were of iron,  its nails of brass, which devoured, broke in pieces,  stamped the residue with its feet,
concerning the ten horns that were on its head,  the other horn which came up,  before which three fell, even that horn that had eyes,  a mouth that spoke great things, whose look was greater than its fellows.
I beheld,  the same horn made war with the sanctified,  prevailed against them
until the ancient of days came. And judgment was given to the sanctified of the Most High,  the time came that the sanctified possessed the kingdom.
Thus he said, The fourth beast shall be a fourth kingdom upon earth, which shall be different from all the kingdoms,  shall devour the whole earth,  shall tread it down,  break it in pieces.
as for the ten horns, out of this kingdom ten kings shall arise. And another shall arise after them,  he shall be different from the former. And he shall put down three kings.
he shall speak words against the Most High,  shall wear out the sanctified of the Most High. And he shall think to change the times and the law,  they shall be given into his hand until a time and times and half a time.
But the judgment shall be set,  they shall take away his dominion, to consume and to destroy it to the end.
the kingdom and the dominion,  the greatness of the kingdoms under the whole heaven, shall be given to the people of the sanctified of the Most High. His kingdom is an everlasting kingdom,  all dominions shall serve and obey him.
Here is the end of the matter. As for me, Daniel, my thoughts troubled me much,  my countenance was changed in me,  I kept the matter in my heart.
In the third year of the reign of king Belshazzar a vision appeared to me, even to me, Daniel, after that which appeared to me at the first.
I saw in the vision, now it was so, that when I saw, I was in Shushan the palace, which is in the province of Elam,  I saw in the vision,  I was by the river Ulai.
Then I lifted up my eyes,  saw, , behold, there stood before the river a ram which had two horns. And the two horns were high,  one was higher than the other,  the higher came up last.
I saw the ram pushing westward,  northward,  southward,  no beasts could stand before him, nor was there any that could deliver out of his hand,  he did according to his will,  magnified himself.
as I was considering, behold, a he-goat came from the west over the face of the whole earth,  did not touch the ground. And the goat had a notable horn between his eyes.
he came to the ram that had the two horns, which I saw standing before the river,  ran upon him in the fury of his power.
I saw him come close to the ram. And he was moved with anger against him,  smote the ram,  broke his two horns. And there was no power in the ram to stand before him,  he cast him down to the ground,  trampled upon him. And there was none that could deliver the ram out of his hand.
the he-goat magnified himself exceedingly. And when he was strong, the great horn was broken,  instead of it there came up four notable horns toward the four winds of heaven.
out of one of them came forth a little horn, which grew exceedingly great, toward the south,  toward the east,  toward the glorious land.
it grew great, even to the host of heaven. And it cast down some of the host and of the stars to the ground,  trampled upon them.
Yea, it magnified itself, even to the Prince of the host. And it took away from him the continual burnt offering,  the place of his sanctuary was cast down.
the host was given over to it together with the continual burnt offering through transgression. And it cast down truth to the ground,  it did its pleasure and prospered.
Then I heard a holy one speaking,  another holy one said to that certain one who spoke, How long shall be the vision of the continual burnt offering,  the transgression that make desolate, to give both the sanctuary and the host to be trodden under foot?
he said to me, To two thousand and three hundred evenings and mornings. Then the sanctuary shall be cleansed.
it came to pass, when I, even I Daniel, had seen the vision, that I sought to understand it, , behold, there stood before me someone as the appearance of a man.
I heard a man's voice between the banks of the Ulai, which called,  said, Gabriel, make this man to understand the vision.
So he came near where I stood. And when he came, I was frightened,  fell upon my face. But he said to me, Understand, O son of man, for the vision belongs to the time of the end.
Now as he was speaking with me, I fell into a deep sleep with my face toward the ground,  he touched me,  set me upright.
he said, Behold, I will make thee know what shall be in the latter time of the indignation, for it belongs to the appointed time of the end.
The ram which thou saw, that had the two horns, they are the kings of Media and Persia.
the rough he-goat is the king of Greece. And the great horn that is between his eyes is the first king.
as for that which was broken, in the place of which four stood up, four kingdoms shall stand up out of the nation,  not with his power.
in the latter time of their kingdom, when the transgressors have come to the full, a king of fierce countenance,  understanding hidden things, shall stand up.
his power shall be mighty,  not by his own power,  he shall destroy amazingly,  shall prosper and do his pleasure. And he shall destroy the mighty ones and the holy people.
through his policy he shall cause deceit to prosper in his hand,  he shall magnify himself in his heart. And he shall destroy many in their security. He shall also stand up against the Prince of princes,  he shall be broken without a hand.
the vision of the evenings and mornings which has been told is true. But shut thou up the vision, for it belongs to many days to come.
I, Daniel, fainted,  was sick certain days. Then I rose up,  did the king's business. And I wondered at the vision,  none understood it.
In the first year of Darius the son of Ahasuerus, of the seed of the Medes, who was made king over the realm of the Chaldeans,
in the first year of his reign, I, Daniel, understood by the books the number of the years of which the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah the prophet, for the accomplishing of the desolations of Jerusalem, even seventy years.
I set my face to the Lord God, to seek by prayer and supplications, with fasting and sackcloth and ashes.
I prayed to Jehovah my God,  made confession,  said, Oh, Lord, the great and fearful God, who keeps covenant and loving kindness with those who love him and keep his commandments,
we have sinned,  have dealt perversely,  have done wickedly,  have rebelled, even turning aside from thy precepts and from thine ordinances,
nor have we hearkened to thy servants the prophets, who spoke in thy name to our kings, our rulers,  our fathers,  to all the people of the land.
O Lord, righteousness belongs to thee,  to us confusion of face, as at this day, to the men of Judah,  to the inhabitants of Jerusalem,  to all Israel, who are near,  who are far off, through all the countries where thou have driven them, because of their trespass that they have trespassed against thee.
O Lord, to us belongs confusion of face, to our kings, to our rulers,  to our fathers, because we have sinned against thee.
To the Lord our God belong mercies and forgiveness, for we have rebelled against him,
nor have we obeyed the voice of Jehovah our God, to walk in his laws, which he set before us by his servants the prophets.
Yea, all Israel have transgressed thy law, even turning aside, that they should not obey thy voice. Therefore the curse has been poured out upon us,  the oath that is written in the law of Moses the servant of God. For we have sinned against him.
he has confirmed his words, which he spoke against us,  against our judges who judged us, by bringing upon us a great evil, for under the whole heaven has not been done as has been done upon Jerusalem.
As it is written in the law of Moses, all this evil has come upon us. Yet we have not entreated the favor of Jehovah our God, that we should turn from our iniquities,  have discernment in thy truth.
Therefore Jehovah has watched over the evil,  brought it upon us, for Jehovah our God is righteous in all his works which he does,  we have not obeyed his voice.
now, O Lord our God, who has brought thy people forth out of the land of Egypt with a mighty hand,  has gotten thee renown, as at this day, we have sinned, we have done wickedly.
O Lord, according to all thy righteousness, let thine anger and thy wrath, I pray thee, be turned away from thy city Jerusalem, thy holy mountain. Because for our sins,  for the iniquities of our fathers, Jerusalem and thy people have become a reproach to all who are round about us.
Now therefore, O our God, hearken to the prayer of thy servant,  to his supplications,  cause thy face to shine upon thy sanctuary that is desolate, for the Lord's sake.
O my God, incline thine ear,  hear. Open thine eyes,  behold our desolations,  the city which is called by thy name. For we do not present our supplications before thee for our righteousness,  for thy great mercies' sake.
O Lord, hear. O Lord, forgive. O Lord, hearken and do. Defer not, for thine own sake, O my God, because thy city and thy people are called by thy name.
while I was speaking,  praying,  confessing my sin and the sin of my people Israel,  presenting my supplication before Jehovah my God for the holy mountain of my God,
yea, while I was speaking in prayer, the man Gabriel, whom I had seen in the vision at the beginning, being caused to fly swiftly, touched me about the time of the evening oblation.
he instructed me,  talked with me,  said, O Daniel, I have now come forth to give thee wisdom and understanding.
At the beginning of thy supplications the commandment went forth,  I have come to tell thee, for thou are greatly beloved. Therefore consider the matter,  understand the vision.
Seventy weeks are decreed upon thy people and upon thy holy city, to finish transgression,  to make an end of sins,  to make reconciliation for iniquity,  to bring in everlasting righteousness,  to seal up vision and prophecy,  to anoint the most holy.
Know therefore and discern, that from the going forth of the commandment to restore and to build Jerusalem to the anointed one, the Prince, shall be seven weeks,  sixty-two weeks. It shall be built again, with street and moat, even in troublesome times.
after the sixty-two weeks the anointed one shall be cut off,  shall have nothing. And the people of the prince who shall come shall destroy the city and the sanctuary,  the end of it shall be with a flood. And even to the end shall be war; desolations are determined.
he shall make a firm covenant with many for one week. And in the midst of the week he shall cause the sacrifice and the oblation to cease. And upon the wing of abominations shall come one who makes desolate. And even to the full end,  that determined, wrath shall be poured out upon the desolate.
In the third year of Cyrus king of Persia a thing was revealed to Daniel, whose name was called Belteshazzar,  the thing was true, even a great warfare. And he understood the thing,  had understanding of the vision.
In those days I, Daniel, was mourning three whole weeks.
I ate no pleasant bread. Neither flesh nor wine came into my mouth. Neither did I anoint myself at all, till three whole weeks were fulfilled.
in the twenty-fourth day of the first month, as I was by the side of the great river, which is Hiddekel,
I lifted up my eyes,  looked. And, behold, a man clothed in linen, whose loins were girded with pure gold of Uphaz.
Also his body was like the beryl,  his face as the appearance of lightning,  his eyes as flaming torches,  his arms and his feet like burnished brass,  the voice of his words like the voice of a multitude.
I, Daniel, alone saw the vision, for the men who were with me did not see the vision,  a great quaking fell upon them,  they fled to hide themselves.
So I was left alone,  saw this great vision. And there remained no strength in me, for my fitness was turned in me into debility,  I retained no strength.
Yet I heard the voice of his words. And when I heard the voice of his words, then I fell into a deep sleep on my face, with my face toward the ground.
And, behold, a hand touched me, which set me upon my knees and upon the palms of my hands.
he said to me, O Daniel, thou man greatly beloved, understand the words that I speak to thee,  stand upright, for I am now sent to thee. And when he had spoken this word to me, I stood, trembling.
Then he said to me, Fear not, Daniel, for from the first day that thou set thy heart to understand,  to humble thyself before thy God, thy words were heard. And I have come for thy words' sake.
But the ruler of the kingdom of Persia withstood me twenty-one days, , lo, Michael, one of the chief princes, came to help me. And I remained there with the kings of Persia.
I have come now to make thee understand what shall befall thy people in the latter days, for the vision is yet for many days.
when he had spoken to me according to these words, I set my face toward the ground,  was mute.
And, behold, someone in the likeness of the sons of men touched my lips. Then I opened my mouth,  spoke and said to him who stood before me, O my lord, because of the vision my pains have turned upon me,  I retain no strength.
For how can the servant of this my lord talk with this my lord? For as for me, straightaway there remained no strength in me, nor was there breath left in me.
Then someone like the appearance of a man touched me again,  he strengthened me.
he said, O man greatly beloved, fear not. Peace be to thee. Be strong, yea, be strong. And when he spoke to me, I was strengthened,  said, Let my lord speak, for thou have strengthened me.
Then he said, Do thou know why I have come to thee? And now I will return to fight with the ruler of Persia. And when I go forth, lo, the ruler of Greece shall come.
But I will tell thee that which is inscribed in the writing of truth. And there is none who holds with me against these,  Michael your prince.
as for me, in the first year of Darius the Mede, I stood up to confirm and strengthen him.
now I will show thee the truth. Behold, there shall stand up yet three kings in Persia,  the fourth shall be far richer than them all. And when he has grown strong through his riches, he shall stir up all against the realm of Greece.
a mighty king shall stand up, who shall rule with great dominion,  do according to his will.
when he shall stand up, his kingdom shall be broken,  shall be divided toward the four winds of heaven,  not to his posterity, nor according to his dominion with which he ruled, for his kingdom shall be plucked up, even for others besides these.
the king of the south shall be strong,  one of his rulers. And he shall be powerful over him,  have dominion. His dominion shall be a great dominion.
at the end of years they shall join themselves together. And the daughter of the king of the south shall come to the king of the north to make an agreement,  she shall not retain the strength of her arm, nor shall he stand, nor his arm. But she shall be given up,  also those who brought her,  he who begot her,  he who strengthened her in those times.
But out of a shoot from her roots shall a man stand up in his place, who shall come to the army,  shall enter into the fortress of the king of the north,  shall deal against them,  shall prevail.
also their gods, with their molten images,  with their goodly vessels of silver and of gold, he shall carry captive into Egypt,  he shall refrain from the king of the north some years.
he shall come into the realm of the king of the south,  he shall return into his own land.
his sons shall war,  shall assemble a multitude of great forces, which shall come on,  overflow,  pass through. And they shall return and war, even to his fortress.
the king of the south shall be moved with anger,  shall come forth and fight with him, even with the king of the north. And he shall set forth a great multitude,  the multitude shall be given into his hand.
the multitude shall be lifted up,  his heart shall be exalted. And he shall cast down tens of thousands,  he shall not prevail.
the king of the north shall return,  shall set forth a multitude greater than the former,  he shall come on at the end of the times, even of years, with a great army and with much substance.
in those times many shall stand up against the king of the south. Also the sons of the violent among thy people shall lift themselves up to establish the vision,  they shall fall.
So the king of the north shall come,  cast up a mound,  take a well-fortified city. And the forces of the south shall not stand, nor his chosen people. Neither shall there be any strength to stand.
But he who comes against him shall do according to his own will,  none shall stand before him. And he shall stand in the glorious land,  in his hand shall be destruction.
he shall set his face to come with the strength of his whole kingdom,  with him equitable conditions,  he shall perform them. And he shall give him the daughter of women, to corrupt her,  she shall not stand, nor be for him.
After this he shall turn his face to the isles,  shall take many. But a ruler shall cause the reproach offered by him to cease. Yea, moreover, he shall cause his reproach to turn upon him.
Then he shall turn his face toward the fortresses of his own land,  he shall stumble and fall,  shall not be found.
Then someone shall stand up in his place who shall cause an exactor to pass through the glory of the kingdom,  within a few days he shall be destroyed, neither in anger, nor in battle.
in his place he who is contemptible shall stand up, to whom they had not given the honor of the kingdom. But he shall come in time of security,  shall obtain the kingdom by flatteries.
the overwhelming forces shall be overwhelmed from before him,  shall be broken, yea, also the ruler of the covenant.
after the league made with him, he shall work deceitfully, for he shall come up,  shall become strong, with a small people.
He shall come in time of security even upon the fattest places of the province,  he shall do that which his fathers have not done, nor his fathers' fathers. He shall scatter among them prey,  spoil,  substance. Yea, he shall devise his devices against the strongholds, even for a time.
he shall stir up his power and his courage against the king of the south with a great army. And the king of the south shall war in battle with a very great and mighty army,  he shall not stand, for they shall devise devices against him.
Yea, those who eat of his food shall destroy him,  his army shall overflow,  many shall fall down slain.
as for both these kings, their hearts shall be to do mischief,  they shall speak lies at one table. But it shall not prosper, for yet the end shall be at the time appointed.
Then he shall return into his land with great substance. And his heart shall be against the holy covenant,  he shall do his pleasure,  return to his own land.
At the time appointed he shall return,  come into the south,  it shall not be in the latter time as it was in the former.
For ships of Kittim shall come against him. Therefore he shall be grieved,  shall return,  have indignation against the holy covenant,  shall do his pleasure. He shall even return,  have regard to those who forsake the holy covenant.
forces shall stand on his part,  they shall profane the sanctuary, even the fortress,  shall take away the continual burnt offering,  they shall set up the abomination that makes desolate.
he shall pervert by flatteries such as do wickedly against the covenant. But the people who know their God shall be strong,  do exploits.
those who are wise among the people shall instruct many, yet they shall fall by the sword and by flame, by captivity and by spoil, many days.
Now when they shall fall, they shall be helped with a little help,  many shall join themselves to them with flatteries.
some of those who are wise shall fall, to refine them,  to purify,  to make them white, even to the time of the end, because it is yet for the time appointed.
the king shall do according to his will. And he shall exalt himself,  magnify himself above every god,  shall speak marvelous things against the God of gods. And he shall prosper till the indignation be accomplished, for that which is determined shall be done.
Neither shall he regard the gods of his fathers, nor the desire of women, nor regard any god, for he shall magnify himself above all.
But in his place he shall honor the god of fortresses. And a god whom his fathers did not know, he shall honor with gold,  silver,  with precious stones,  pleasant things.
he shall deal with the strongest fortresses by the help of a foreign god. Whoever acknowledges him he will increase with glory,  he shall cause them to rule over many,  shall divide the land for a price.
at the time of the end, the king of the south shall contend with him,  the king of the north shall come against him like a whirlwind, with chariots,  with horsemen,  with many ships,  he shall enter into the countries,  shall overflow and pass through.
He shall also enter into the glorious land,  many countries shall be overthrown. But these shall be delivered out of his hand: Edom,  Moab,  the chief of the sons of Ammon.
He shall stretch forth his hand also upon the countries,  the land of Egypt shall not escape.
But he shall have power over the treasures of gold and of silver,  over all the precious things of Egypt. And the Libyans and the Ethiopians shall be at his steps.
But news out of the east and out of the north shall trouble him,  he shall go forth with great fury to destroy and to utterly sweep away many.
he shall plant the tents of his palace between the sea and the glorious holy mountain, yet he shall come to his end,  none shall help him.
at that time Michael shall stand up, the great prince who stands for the sons of thy people. And there shall be a time of trouble, such as never was since there was a nation even to that same time. And at that time thy people shall be delivered, everyone who shall be found written in the book.
many of those who sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life,  some to shame and everlasting contempt.
those who are wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament,  those who turn many to righteousness as the stars forever and ever.
But thou, O Daniel, shut up the words,  seal the book, even to the time of the end. Many shall run to and fro,  knowledge shall be increased.
Then I, Daniel, looked, , behold, another two stood, the one on the brink of the river on this side,  the other on the brink of the river on that side.
one said to the man clothed in linen, who was above the waters of the river, How long shall it be to the end of these wonders?
I heard the man clothed in linen, who was above the waters of the river, when he held up his right hand and his left hand to heaven,  swore by him who lives forever that it shall be for a time, times,  a half. And when they have made an end of breaking in pieces the power of the holy people, all these things shall be finished.
I heard,  I did not understand. Then I said, O my lord, what shall be the outcome of these things?
he said, Go thy way, Daniel, for the words are shut up and sealed till the time of the end.
Many shall purify themselves,  make themselves white,  be refined,  the wicked shall do wickedly. And none of the wicked shall understand,  those who are wise shall understand.
from the time that the continual burnt offering shall be taken away,  the abomination that makes desolate is set up, there shall be a thousand and two hundred and ninety days.
Blessed is he who waits,  comes to the thousand three hundred and thirty-five days.
But go thou thy way till the end is. For thou shall rest,  shall stand in thy lot at the end of the days.
Hosea
The word of Jehovah that came to Hosea the son of Beeri, in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz,  Hezekiah, kings of Judah,  in the days of Jeroboam the son of Joash, king of Israel.
When Jehovah spoke at the first by Hosea, Jehovah said to Hosea, Go, take to thee a wife of whoredom and children of whoredom, for the land commits great whoredom, departing from Jehovah.
So he went and took Gomer the daughter of Diblaim,  she conceived,  bore him a son.
Jehovah said to him, Call his name Jezreel, for yet a little while,  I will avenge the blood of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu,  will cause the kingdom of the house of Israel to cease.
it shall come to pass at that day, that I will break the bow of Israel in the valley of Jezreel.
she conceived again,  bore a daughter. And Jehovah said to him, Call her name Lo-ruhamah, for I will no more have mercy upon the house of Israel, that I should in any way pardon them.
But I will have mercy upon the house of Judah,  will save them by Jehovah their God,  will not save them by bow, nor by sword, nor by battle, by horses, nor by horsemen.
Now when she had weaned Lo-ruhamah, she conceived,  bore a son.
Jehovah said, Call his name Lo-ammi, for ye are not my people,  I will not be yours.
Yet the number of the sons of Israel shall be as the sand of the sea, which cannot be measured nor numbered. And it shall come to pass that, in the place where it was said to them, Ye are not my people, it shall be said to them, The sons of the living God.
the sons of Judah and the sons of Israel shall be gathered together,  they shall appoint themselves one head,  shall go up from the land, for great shall be the day of Jezreel.
Say ye to your brothers, Ammi,  to your sisters, Ruhamah.
Contend with your mother. Contend, for she is not my wife, nor am I her husband. And let her put away her whoredoms from her face,  her adulteries from between her breasts,
lest I strip her naked,  set her as in the day that she was born,  make her as a wilderness,  set her like a dry land,  kill her with thirst.
Yea, I will have no mercy upon her sons, for they are sons of whoredom,
for their mother has played the harlot. She who conceived them has done shamefully, for she said, I will go after my lovers, who give me my bread and my water, my wool and my flax, my oil and my drink.
Therefore, behold, I will hedge up thy way with thorns,  I will build a wall against her, that she shall not find her paths.
she shall follow after her lovers,  she shall not overtake them. And she shall seek them,  shall not find them. Then she shall say, I will go and return to my first husband, for it was better with me then than now.
For she did not know that I gave her the grain,  the new wine,  the oil,  multiplied to her silver and gold, which they used for Baal.
Therefore I will take back my grain in the time of it,  my new wine in the season of it,  will pluck away my wool and my flax which should have covered her nakedness.
now I will uncover her lewdness in the sight of her lovers,  none shall deliver her out of my hand.
I will also cause all her mirth to cease, her feasts, her new moons,  her sabbaths,  all her solemn assemblies.
I will lay waste her vines and her fig trees, of which she has said, These are my hire that my lovers have given me. And I will make them a forest,  the beasts of the field shall eat them.
I will visit upon her the days of the Baalim, to which she burned incense when she decked herself with her earrings and her jewels,  went after her lovers,  forgot me, says Jehovah.
Therefore, behold, I will allure her,  bring her into the wilderness,  speak soothingly to her.
I will give her her vineyards from there,  the valley of Achor for a door of hope. And she shall make answer there, as in the days of her youth,  as in the day when she came up out of the land of Egypt.
it shall be at that day, says Jehovah, that thou shall call me Ishi,  shall no more call me Baali.
For I will take away the names of the Baalim out of her mouth,  they shall no more be mentioned by their name.
in that day I will make a covenant for them with the beasts of the field,  with the birds of the heavens,  with the creeping things of the ground. And I will break the bow and the sword and the battle out of the land,  will make them to lie down safely.
I will betroth thee to me forever. Yea, I will betroth thee to me in righteousness,  in justice,  in loving kindness,  in mercies.
I will even betroth thee to me in faithfulness,  thou shall know Jehovah.
it shall come to pass in that day, I will answer, says Jehovah. I will answer the heavens,  they shall answer the earth,
the earth shall answer the grain,  the new wine,  the oil,  they shall answer Jezreel.
I will sow her to me in the earth. And I will have mercy upon her who had not obtained mercy. And I will say to those who were not my people, Thou are my people,  they shall say, My God.
Jehovah said to me, Go again, love a woman beloved of her friend,  an adulteress, even as Jehovah loves the sons of Israel, though they turn to other gods,  love cakes of raisins.
So I bought her to me for fifteen pieces of silver,  a homer of barley,  a half-homer of barley.
I said to her, Thou shall abide for me many days. Thou shall not play the harlot,  thou shall not be any man's wife. So I will also be toward thee.
For the sons of Israel shall abide many days without king,  without ruler,  without sacrifice,  without pillar,  without ephod or teraphim.
Afterward the sons of Israel shall return and seek Jehovah their God and David their king,  shall come with fear to Jehovah and to his goodness in the latter days.
Hear the word of Jehovah, ye sons of Israel, for Jehovah has a controversy with the inhabitants of the land, because there is no truth, nor goodness, nor knowledge of God in the land.
There is nothing but swearing and breaking faith,  killing,  stealing,  committing adultery. They break out,  blood touches blood.
Therefore the land shall mourn,  everyone who dwells in it shall languish with the beasts of the field and the birds of the heavens. Yea, the fishes of the sea shall also be taken away.
Yet, let no man strive, nor let any man reprove, for thy people are as those who strive with the priest.
thou shall stumble in the day,  the prophet also shall stumble with thee in the night. And I will destroy thy mother.
My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge. Because thou have rejected knowledge, I also will reject thee, that thou shall be no priest to me. Since thou have forgotten the law of thy God, I also will forget thy sons.
As they were multiplied, so they sinned against me. I will change their glory into shame.
They feed on the sin of my people,  set their heart on their iniquity.
it shall be, like people, like priest. And I will punish them for their ways,  will requite them their doings.
they shall eat,  not have enough. They shall play the harlot,  shall not increase, because they have left off taking heed to Jehovah.
Whoredom and wine and new wine take away the understanding.
My people ask counsel at their stock,  their staff declares to them, for the spirit of whoredom has caused them to err,  they have played the harlot, departing from under their God.
They sacrifice upon the tops of the mountains,  burn incense upon the hills, under oaks and poplars and terebinths, because the shadow of it is good. Therefore your daughters play the harlot,  your brides commit adultery.
I will not punish your daughters when they play the harlot, nor your brides when they commit adultery. For themselves go apart with harlots,  they sacrifice with the prostitutes. And the people who do not understand shall be overthrown.
Though thou, Israel, play the harlot, yet let not Judah offend,  come not ye to Gilgal, nor go ye up to Beth-aven, nor swear, As Jehovah lives.
For Israel has behaved himself stubbornly, like a stubborn heifer. Now Jehovah will feed them as a lamb in a large place.
Ephraim is joined to idols, let him alone.
Their drink has become sour. They play the harlot continually. Her rulers dearly love shame.
The wind has wrapped her up in its wings,  they shall be put to shame because of their sacrifices.
Hear this, O ye priests,  hearken, O house of Israel,  give ear, O house of the king, for to you pertains the judgment. For ye have been a snare at Mizpah,  a net spread upon Tabor.
the revolters have gone deep in making slaughter,  I am a rebuker of them all.
I know Ephraim,  Israel is not hid from me. For now, O Ephraim, thou have played the harlot; Israel is defiled.
Their doings will not allow them to turn to their God, for the spirit of whoredom is within them,  they do not know Jehovah.
the pride of Israel testifies to his face. Therefore Israel and Ephraim shall stumble in their iniquity. Judah also shall stumble with them.
They shall go with their flocks and with their herds to seek Jehovah,  they shall not find him. He has withdrawn himself from them.
They have dealt treacherously against Jehovah, for they have borne strange sons. Now the new moon shall devour them with their fields.
Blow ye the cornet in Gibeah,  the trumpet in Ramah. Sound an alarm at Beth-aven, behind thee, O Benjamin.
Ephraim shall become a desolation in the day of rebuke. I have made known that which shall surely be among the tribes of Israel.
The rulers of Judah are like those who remove the landmark. I will pour out my wrath upon them like water.
Ephraim is oppressed. He is crushed in judgment, because he was content to walk after man's command.
Therefore I am to Ephraim as a moth,  to the house of Judah as rottenness.
When Ephraim saw his sickness,  Judah saw his wound, then Ephraim went to Assyria,  sent to king Jareb. But he is not able to heal you, nor will he cure you of your wound.
For I will be to Ephraim as a lion,  as a young lion to the house of Judah. I, even I, will tear and go away, I will carry off,  there shall be none to deliver.
I will go and return to my place, till they acknowledge their offense,  seek my face. In their affliction they will seek me earnestly.
Come,  let us return to Jehovah, for he has torn,  he will heal us. He has smitten,  he will bind us up.
After two days he will revive us. On the third day he will raise us up,  we shall live before him.
let us know, let us follow on to know Jehovah. His going forth is sure as the morning,  he will come to us as the rain, as the latter rain that waters the earth.
O Ephraim, what shall I do to thee? O Judah, what shall I do to thee? For your goodness is as a morning cloud,  as the dew that goes away early.
Therefore I have hewed them by the prophets. I have slain them by the words of my mouth. And thy judgments are as the light that goes forth.
For I desire mercy,  not sacrifice,  the knowledge of God more than burnt offerings.
But like Adam they have transgressed the covenant. There they have dealt treacherously against me.
Gilead is a city of those who work iniquity; it is stained with blood.
as troops of robbers wait for a man, so the company of priests murder in the way toward Shechem. Yea, they have committed iniquity.
I have seen a horrible thing in the house of Israel. Whoredom is there in Ephraim; Israel is defiled.
Also, O Judah, there is a harvest appointed for thee when I bring back the captivity of my people.
When I would heal Israel, then the iniquity of Ephraim is uncovered,  the wickedness of Samaria. For they commit falsehood,  the thief enters in,  the troop of robbers ravages outside.
they do not consider in their hearts that I remember all their wickedness. Now their own doings have surrounded them; they are before my face.
They make the king glad with their wickedness,  the rulers with their lies.
They are all adulterers. They are as an oven heated by the baker. He ceases to stir the fire, from the kneading of the dough, until it is leavened.
On the day of our king the rulers made themselves sick with the heat of wine. He stretched out his hand with scoffers.
For they have made their heart ready like an oven, while they lie in wait. Their baker sleeps all the night. In the morning it burns as a flaming fire.
They are all hot as an oven,  devour their judges. All their kings are fallen. There is none among those who call to me.
Ephraim, he mixes himself among the peoples. Ephraim is a cake not turned.
Strangers have devoured his strength,  he does not know. Yea, gray hairs are here and there upon him,  he does not know.
the pride of Israel testifies to his face. Yet they have not returned to Jehovah their God, nor sought him for all this.
Ephraim is like a silly dove, without understanding. They call to Egypt. They go to Assyria.
When they shall go, I will spread my net upon them. I will bring them down as the birds of the heavens. I will chastise them, as their congregation has heard.
Woe to them! For they have wandered from me. Destruction to them! For they have trespassed against me. Though I would redeem them, yet they have spoken lies against me.
they have not cried to me with their heart,  they howl upon their beds. They assemble themselves for grain and new wine. They rebel against me.
Though I have taught and strengthened their arms, yet they devise mischief against me.
They return,  not to him on high. They are like a deceitful bow. Their rulers shall fall by the sword for the rage of their tongue. This shall be their derision in the land of Egypt.
Set the trumpet to thy mouth. As an eagle he comes against the house of Jehovah, because they have transgressed my covenant,  trespassed against my law.
They shall cry to me, My God, we, Israel know thee.
Israel has cast off that which is good. The enemy shall pursue him.
They have set up kings,  not by me. They have made rulers,  I knew it not. They have made themselves idols of their silver and their gold, that they may be cut off.
He has cast off thy calf, O Samaria. My anger is kindled against them. How long will it be ere they attain to innocence?
For even this is from Israel: the workman made it,  it is no God. Yea, the calf of Samaria shall be broken in pieces.
For they sow the wind,  they shall reap the whirlwind. He has no standing grain. The blade shall yield no meal. If so be it yields, strangers shall swallow it up.
Israel is swallowed up. They are now among the nations as a vessel in which no man delights.
For they have gone up to Assyria like a wild donkey alone by himself. Ephraim has hired lovers.
Yea, though they hire among the nations, I will now gather them,  they shall begin to be diminished because of the burden of the king of rulers.
Because Ephraim has multiplied altars for sinning, altars have been to him for sinning.
I wrote for him the multitude of my law,  they are counted as a strange thing.
As for the sacrifices of my offerings, they sacrifice flesh and eat it,  Jehovah does not accept them. He will now remember their iniquity,  visit their sins. They shall return to Egypt.
For Israel has forgotten his maker,  built palaces. And Judah has multiplied fortified cities. But I will send a fire upon his cities,  it shall devour the castles thereof.
Rejoice not, O Israel, for joy like the peoples, for thou have played the harlot, departing from thy God. Thou have loved hire upon every grain-floor.
The threshing floor and the winepress shall not feed them,  the new wine shall fail her.
They shall not dwell in Jehovah's land,  Ephraim shall return to Egypt,  they shall eat unclean food in Assyria.
They shall not pour out wine offerings to Jehovah, nor shall they be pleasing to him. Their sacrifices shall be to them as the bread of mourners. All who eat of it shall be polluted, for their bread shall be for their appetite. It shall not come into the house of Jehovah.
What will ye do in the day of solemn assembly,  in the day of the feast of Jehovah?
For, lo, they have gone away from destruction, yet Egypt shall gather them up. Memphis shall bury them. Their pleasant things of silver, nettles shall possess them. Thorns shall be in their tents.
The days of visitation have come. The days of recompense have come. Israel shall know it. The prophet is a fool, the spiritual man is mad, for the abundance of thine iniquity,  because the enmity is great.
Ephraim was a watchman with my God. As for the prophet, a fowler's snare is in all his ways,  enmity in the house of his God.
They have deeply corrupted themselves, as in the days of Gibeah. He will remember their iniquity. He will visit their sins.
I found Israel like grapes in the wilderness. I saw your fathers as the first ripe in the fig tree at its first season. But they came to Baal-peor,  consecrated themselves to the shameful thing,  became abominable like that which they loved.
As for Ephraim, their glory shall fly away like a bird. There shall be no birth,  none with child,  no conception.
Though they bring up their sons, yet I will bereave them, so that not a man shall be left. Yea, woe also to them when I depart from them!
Ephraim, just as I have seen Tyre, is planted in a pleasant place,  Ephraim shall bring out his sons to the slayer.
Give them, O Jehovah-what will thou give? Give them a miscarrying womb and dry breasts.
All their wickedness is in Gilgal, for there I hated them. Because of the wickedness of their doings I will drive them out of my house. I will love them no more. All their rulers are rebels.
Ephraim is smitten. Their root is dried up. They shall bear no fruit. Yea, though they bring forth, yet I will kill the beloved fruit of their womb.
My God will cast them away because they did not hearken to him,  they shall be wanderers among the nations.
Israel is a luxuriant vine that puts forth his fruit. According to the abundance of his fruit he has multiplied his altars. According to the goodness of their land they have made goodly pillars.
Their heart is divided. Now they shall be found guilty. He will smite their altars. He will destroy their pillars.
Surely now they shall say, We have no king, for we fear not Jehovah. And the king, what can he do for us?
They speak vain words, swearing falsely in making covenants. Therefore judgment springs up as hemlock in the furrows of the field.
The inhabitants of Samaria shall be in terror for the calves of Beth-aven. For the people of it shall mourn over it,  the priests of it, who rejoiced over it for the glory of it, because it has departed from it.
It shall also be carried to Assyria for a present to king Jareb. Ephraim shall receive shame,  Israel shall be ashamed of his own counsel.
As for Samaria, its king is cut off, as foam upon the water.
The high places also of Aven, the sin of Israel, shall be destroyed. The thorn and the thistle shall come up on their altars,  they shall say to the mountains, Cover us,  to the hills, Fall on us.
O Israel, thou have sinned from the days of Gibeah. There they stood. The battle against the sons of iniquity does not overtake them in Gibeah.
When it is my desire, I will chastise them. And the peoples shall be gathered against them, when they are bound to their two transgressions.
Ephraim is a heifer that is taught, that loves to tread out the grain. But I have passed over upon her fair neck. I will set a rider on Ephraim. Judah shall plow. Jacob shall break his clods.
Sow to yourselves in righteousness. Reap according to kindness. Break up your fallow ground, for it is time to seek Jehovah, till he comes and rains righteousness upon you.
Ye have plowed wickedness. Ye have reaped iniquity. Ye have eaten the fruit of lies. For thou trusted in thy way, in the multitude of thy mighty men.
Therefore a tumult shall arise among thy people,  all thy fortresses shall be destroyed, as Shalman destroyed Beth-arbel in the day of battle; the mother was dashed in pieces with her sons.
So shall Bethel do to you because of your great wickedness. At daybreak the king of Israel shall be utterly cut off.
When Israel was a child, then I loved him,  out of Egypt I called my son.
The more the prophets called them, the more they went from them. They sacrificed to the Baalim,  burned incense to graven images.
Yet I taught Ephraim to walk. I took them on my arms,  they did not know that I healed them.
I drew them with cords of a man, with bands of love,  I was to them as those who lift up the yoke on their jaws. And I laid food before them.
They shall not return into the land of Egypt,  the Assyrian shall be their king, because they refused to return to me.
the sword shall fall upon their cities,  shall consume their bars,  devour them, because of their own counsels.
my people are bent on backsliding from me. Though they call them to him who is on high, none at all will exalt him.
How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? How shall I cast thee off, Israel? How shall I make thee as Admah? How shall I set thee as Zeboiim? My heart is turned within me. My compassions are kindled together.
I will not execute the fierceness of my anger. I will not return to destroy Ephraim. For I am God,  not man, the Holy One in the midst of thee,  I will not come in wrath.
They shall walk after Jehovah, who will roar like a lion. For he will roar,  the sons shall come trembling from the west.
They shall come trembling as a bird out of Egypt,  as a dove out of the land of Assyria. And I will make them to dwell in their houses, says Jehovah.
Ephraim encompasses me around with falsehood,  the house of Israel with deceit,  Judah yet rules with God,  is faithful with the Holy One.
Ephraim feeds on wind,  follows after the east wind. He continually multiplies lies and desolation. And they make a covenant with Assyria,  oil is carried into Egypt.
Jehovah has also a controversy with Judah,  will punish Jacob according to his ways. He will recompense him according to his doings.
In the womb he took his brother by the heel,  in his manhood he had strength with God.
Yea, he had strength over the agent,  prevailed, as he wept,  made supplication to him. He found him at Bethel,  there he spoke with us.
Even Jehovah, the God of hosts, Jehovah is his memorial.
Therefore turn thou to thy God. Keep kindness and justice,  wait for thy God continually.
He is a Canaanite. The balances of deceit are in his hand. He loves to oppress.
Ephraim said, Surely I have become rich. I have found wealth for myself. In all my labors they shall find no iniquity in me that is sin.
But I am Jehovah thy God from the land of Egypt. I will yet again make thee to dwell in tents, as in the days of the solemn feast.
I have also spoken to the prophets,  I have multiplied visions. And by the ministry of the prophets I have used similitudes.
Is Gilead iniquity? They are altogether false. In Gilgal they sacrifice bullocks. Yea, their altars are as heaps in the furrows of the field.
Jacob fled into the field of Aram,  Israel served for a wife,  for a wife he kept sheep.
by a prophet Jehovah brought Israel up out of Egypt,  by a prophet he was preserved.
Ephraim has provoked to anger most bitterly. Therefore his blood shall be left upon him,  his reproach his Lord shall return to him.
When Ephraim spoke, there was trembling. He exalted himself in Israel,  when he offended in Baal, he died.
now they sin more and more,  have made themselves molten images of their silver, even idols according to their own understanding, all of them the work of the craftsmen. They say of them, Let the men who sacrifice kiss the calves.
Therefore they shall be as the morning cloud,  as the dew that passes away early, as the chaff that is driven with the whirlwind out of the threshing-floor,  as the smoke out of the chimney.
Yet I am Jehovah thy God from the land of Egypt,  thou shall know no god but me,  besides me there is no savior.
I knew thee in the wilderness, in the land of great drought.
According to their pasture, so they were filled. They were filled,  their heart was exalted. Therefore they have forgotten me.
Therefore I am to them as a lion. As a leopard I will watch by the way.
I will meet them as a bear that is bereaved of her whelps,  will rend the caul of their heart. And there I will devour them like a lioness. The wild beast shall tear them.
It is thy destruction, O Israel, that thou are against me, against thy help.
Where now is thy king, that he may save thee in all thy cities,  thy judges, of whom thou said, Give me a king and rulers?
I have given thee a king in my anger,  have taken him away in my wrath.
The iniquity of Ephraim is bound up. His sin is laid up in store.
The sorrows of a travailing woman shall come upon him. He is an unwise son, for it is time he should not tarry in the place of the breaking forth of sons.
I will ransom them from the power of Sheol. I will redeem them from death. O death, where are thy plagues? O Sheol, where is thy sting? Repentance shall be hid from my eyes.
Though he be fruitful among his brothers, an east wind shall come, the breath of Jehovah coming up from the wilderness,  his spring shall become dry,  his fountain shall be dried up. He shall make spoil of the treasure of all goodly vessels.
Samaria shall bear her guilt, for she has rebelled against her God. They shall fall by the sword. Their infants shall be dashed in pieces,  their women with child shall be ripped up.
O Israel, return to Jehovah thy God, for thou have fallen by thine iniquity.
Take with you words,  return to Jehovah. Say to him, Take away all iniquity,  accept that which is good. So we will render as bullocks the offering of our lips.
Assyria shall not save us. We will not ride upon horses, nor will we say any more to the work of our hands, Our gods. For in thee the fatherless finds mercy.
I will heal their backsliding. I will love them freely. For my anger is turned away from him.
I will be as the dew to Israel. He shall blossom as the lily,  cast forth his roots as Lebanon.
His branches shall spread,  his beauty shall be as the olive tree,  his smell as Lebanon.
Those who dwell under his shadow shall return. They shall revive as the grain,  blossom as the vine. The scent of it shall be as the wine of Lebanon.
Ephraim shall say, What have I to do any more with idols? I have answered,  will regard him. I am like a green fir tree. From me thy fruit is found.
Who is wise, that he may understand these things, prudent, that he may know them? For the ways of Jehovah are right,  the just shall walk in them. But transgressors shall fall therein.
Joel
Joel. The word of Jehovah that came to Joel the son of Pethuel.
Joel. Hear this, ye old men,  give ear, all ye inhabitants of the land. Has this been in your days, or in the days of your fathers?
Joel. Tell ye your sons of it,  let your sons tell their sons,  their sons another generation.
Joel. That which the palmer-worm has left the locust has eaten,  that which the locust has left the canker-worm has eaten,  that which the canker-worm has left the caterpillar has eaten.
Joel. Awake, ye drunkards,  weep,  wail, all ye drinkers of wine, because of the sweet wine, for it is cut off from your mouth.
Joel. For a nation has come up upon my land, strong,  without number. His teeth are the teeth of a lion,  he has the jaw-teeth of a lioness.
Joel. He has laid my vine waste,  barked my fig tree. He has made it clean bare,  cast it away. The branches of it are made white.
Joel. Lament like a virgin girded with sackcloth for the husband of her youth.
Joel. The meal offering and the drink offering are cut off from the house of Jehovah. The priests, Jehovah's ministers, mourn.
Joel. The field is laid waste; the land mourns. For the grain is destroyed, the new wine is dried up, the oil languishes.
Joel. Be confounded, O ye husbandmen. Wail, O ye vinedressers, for the wheat and for the barley, for the harvest of the field is perished.
Joel. The vine is withered,  the fig tree languishes. The pomegranate tree, the palm tree also,  the apple tree, even all the trees of the field are withered. For joy has withered away from the sons of men.
Joel. Gird yourselves with sackcloth,  lament, ye priests. Wail, ye ministers of the altar. Come, lie all night in sackcloth, ye ministers of my God. For the meal offering and the drink offering are withheld from the house of your God.
Joel. Sanctify a fast. Call a solemn assembly. Gather the old men and all the inhabitants of the land to the house of Jehovah your God,  cry to Jehovah.
Joel. Alas for the day! For the day of Jehovah is at hand,  it shall come as destruction from the Almighty.
Joel. Is not the food cut off before our eyes, yea, joy and gladness from the house of our God?
Joel. The seeds rot under their clods. The garners are laid desolate. The barns are broken down. For the grain is withered.
Joel. How do the beasts groan! The herds of cattle are perplexed because they have no pasture, yea, the flocks of sheep are made desolate.
Joel. O Jehovah, to thee do I cry. For the fire has devoured the pastures of the wilderness,  the flame has burned all the trees of the field.
Joel. Yea, the beasts of the field pant to thee, for the water brooks are dried up,  the fire has devoured the pastures of the wilderness.
Joel. Blow ye the trumpet in Zion,  sound an alarm in my holy mountain. Let all the inhabitants of the land tremble. For the day of Jehovah comes, for it is near at hand,
Joel. a day of darkness and gloominess, a day of clouds and thick darkness, as the dawn spreads upon the mountains, a great people and a strong, there has not ever been the like, nor shall be any more after them, even to the years of many generations.
Joel. A fire devours before them,  behind them a flame burns. The land is as the garden of Eden before them,  behind them a desolate wilderness. Yea,  none has escaped them.
Joel. The appearance of them is as the appearance of horses,  as horsemen, so do they run.
Joel. They leap like the noise of chariots on the tops of the mountains, like the noise of a flame of fire that devours the stubble, as a strong people set in battle array.
Joel. At their presence the peoples are in anguish; all faces have grown pale.
Joel. They run like mighty men. They climb the wall like men of war,  they march each one on his ways. And they do not break their ranks.
Joel. Neither does one push another. They march each one in his path,  they burst through the weapons,  do not break off.
Joel. They leap upon the city. They run upon the wall. They climb up into the houses. They enter in at the windows like a thief.
Joel. The earth quakes before them. The heavens tremble. The sun and the moon are darkened,  the stars withdraw their shining.
Joel. And Jehovah utters his voice before his army, for his camp is very great. For he is strong who executes his word. For the day of Jehovah is great and very fearful,  who can abide it?
Joel. Yet even now, says Jehovah, turn ye to me with all your heart,  with fasting,  with weeping,  with mourning.
Joel. And rend your heart,  not your garments,  turn to Jehovah your God, for he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger,  abundant in loving kindness,  relents of the evil.
Joel. Who knows whether he will not turn and relent,  leave a blessing behind him, even a meal offering and a drink offering to Jehovah your God?
Joel. Blow the trumpet in Zion. Sanctify a fast. Call a solemn assembly.
Joel. Gather the people. Sanctify the assembly. Assemble the old men. Gather the sons,  those who suck the breasts. Let the bridegroom go forth from his chamber,  the bride out of her closet.
Joel. Let the priests, the ministers of Jehovah, weep between the porch and the altar,  let them say, Spare thy people, O Jehovah,  do not give thy heritage to reproach, that the nations should rule over them. Why should they say among the peoples, Where is their God?
Joel. Then Jehovah was jealous for his land,  had pity on his people.
Joel. And Jehovah answered and said to his people, Behold, I will send you grain,  new wine,  oil,  ye shall be satisfied therewith. And I will no more make you a reproach among the nations.
Joel. But I will remove the northern army far off from you,  will drive it into a land barren and desolate, its forepart into the eastern sea,  its rear part into the western sea. And its stench shall come up,  its foul odor shall come up, because it has done great things.
Joel. Fear not, O land. Be glad and rejoice, for Jehovah has done great things.
Joel. Be not afraid, ye beasts of the field, for the pastures of the wilderness spring, for the tree bears its fruit, the fig tree and the vine yield their strength.
Joel. Be glad then, ye sons of Zion,  rejoice in Jehovah your God, for he gives you the former rain in just measure,  he causes the rain to come down for you, the former rain and the latter rain, in the first month.
Joel. And the floors shall be full of wheat,  the vats shall overflow with new wine and oil.
Joel. And I will restore to you the years that the locust, the canker-worm,  the caterpillar,  the palmer-worm has eaten-my great army which I sent among you.
Joel. And ye shall eat in plenty and be satisfied. And shall praise the name of Jehovah your God, who has dealt wondrously with you. And my people shall never be put to shame.
Joel. And ye shall know that I am in the midst of Israel,  that I am Jehovah your God,  there is none else. And my people shall never be put to shame.
Joel. And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh,  your sons and your daughters shall prophesy. Your old men shall dream dreams. Your young men shall see visions.
Joel. And also I will pour out my Spirit upon the servants and upon the handmaids in those days.
Joel. And I will show wonders in the heavens and in the earth, blood,  fire,  pillars of smoke.
Joel. The sun shall be turned into darkness,  the moon into blood, before the great and wonderful day of Jehovah comes.
Joel. And it shall come to pass, that whoever shall call on the name of Jehovah shall be saved. For in mount Zion and in Jerusalem there shall be those who escape, as Jehovah has said,  among the remnant those whom Jehovah calls.
Joel. For, behold, in those days,  in that time, when I shall bring back the captivity of Judah and Jerusalem,
Joel. I will gather all nations,  will bring them down into the valley of Jehoshaphat. And I will execute judgment upon them there for my people and for my heritage Israel, whom they have scattered among the nations. And they have parted my land,
Joel. and have cast lots for my people,  have given a boy for a harlot,  sold a girl for wine, that they may drink.
Joel. Yea,  what are ye to me, O Tyre,  Sidon,  all the regions of Philistia? Will ye render me a recompense? And if ye recompense me, I will return your recompense swiftly and speedily upon your own head.
Joel. Inasmuch as ye have taken my silver and my gold,  have carried into your temples my goodly precious things,
Joel. and have sold the sons of Judah and the sons of Jerusalem to the sons of the Grecians, that ye may remove them far from their border,
Joel. behold, I will stir them up out of the place where ye have sold them,  will return your recompense upon your own head.
Joel. And I will sell your sons and your daughters into the hand of the sons of Judah,  they shall sell them to the men of Sheba, to a nation far off. For Jehovah has spoken it.
Joel. Proclaim ye this among the nations: Prepare war. Stir up the mighty men. Let all the men of war draw near. Let them come up.
Joel. Beat your plowshares into swords,  your pruning-hooks into spears. Let the weak say, I am strong.
Joel. Hasten ye,  come, all ye nations round about,  gather yourselves together. Cause thy mighty ones to come down there, O Jehovah.
Joel. Let the nations bestir themselves,  come up to the valley of Jehoshaphat, for there I will sit to judge all the nations round about.
Joel. Put ye in the sickle, for the harvest is ripe. Come, tread ye, for the winepress is full, the vats overflow. For their wickedness is great.
Joel. Multitudes, multitudes in the valley of decision! For the day of Jehovah is near in the valley of decision.
Joel. The sun and the moon are darkened,  the stars withdraw their shining.
Joel. And Jehovah will roar from Zion,  utter his voice from Jerusalem,  the heavens and the earth shall shake. But Jehovah will be a refuge to his people,  a stronghold to the sons of Israel.
Joel. So ye shall know that I am Jehovah your God, dwelling in Zion my holy mountain. Then Jerusalem shall be holy,  no strangers shall pass through her any more.
Joel. And it shall come to pass in that day, that the mountains shall drop down sweet wine,  the hills shall flow with milk,  all the brooks of Judah shall flow with waters. And a fountain shall come forth from the house of Jehovah,  shall water the valley of Shittim.
Joel. Egypt shall be a desolation,  Edom shall be a desolate wilderness, for the violence done to the sons of Judah, because they have shed innocent blood in their land.
Joel. But Judah shall abide forever,  Jerusalem from generation to generation.
Joel. And I will cleanse their blood, that I have not cleansed. For Jehovah dwells in Zion.
Amos
Amos. The words of Amos, who was among the herdsmen of Tekoa, which he saw concerning Israel in the days of Uzziah king of Judah,  in the days of Jeroboam the son of Joash king of Israel, two years before the earthquake.
Amos. And he said, Jehovah will roar from Zion,  utter his voice from Jerusalem,  the pastures of the shepherds shall mourn,  the top of Carmel shall wither.
Amos. Thus says Jehovah: For three transgressions of Damascus, yea, for four, I will not turn away the punishment of it, because they have threshed Gilead with threshing instruments of iron.
Amos. But I will send a fire into the house of Hazael,  it shall devour the palaces of Ben-hadad.
Amos. And I will break the bar of Damascus,  cut off the inhabitant from the valley of Aven,  he who holds the scepter from the house of Eden,  the people of Syria shall go into captivity to Kir, says Jehovah.
Amos. Thus says Jehovah: For three transgressions of Gaza, yea, for four, I will not turn away the punishment of it, because they carried away captive the whole people, to deliver them up to Edom.
Amos. But I will send a fire on the wall of Gaza,  it shall devour the palaces of it.
Amos. And I will cut off the inhabitant from Ashdod,  him who holds the scepter from Ashkelon. And I will turn my hand against Ekron,  the remnant of the Philistines shall perish, says the lord Jehovah.
Amos. Thus says Jehovah: For three transgressions of Tyre, yea, for four, I will not turn away the punishment of it, because they delivered up the whole people to Edom,  did not remember the brotherly covenant.
Amos. But I will send a fire on the wall of Tyre,  it shall devour the palaces of it.
Amos. Thus says Jehovah: For three transgressions of Edom, yea, for four, I will not turn away the punishment of it, because he pursued his brother with the sword,  cast off all pity. And his anger tore perpetually,  he kept his wrath forever.
Amos. But I will send a fire upon Teman,  it shall devour the palaces of Bozrah.
Amos. Thus says Jehovah: For three transgressions of the sons of Ammon, yea, for four, I will not turn away the punishment of it, because they have ripped up the women with child of Gilead, that they may enlarge their border.
Amos. But I will kindle a fire in the wall of Rabbah,  it shall devour the palaces of it, with shouting in the day of battle, with a tempest in the day of the whirlwind.
Amos. And their king shall go into captivity, he and his rulers together, says Jehovah.
Amos. Thus says Jehovah: For three transgressions of Moab, yea, for four, I will not turn away the punishment of it, because he burned the bones of the king of Edom into lime.
Amos. But I will send a fire upon Moab,  it shall devour the palaces of Kerioth,  Moab shall die with tumult, with shouting,  with the sound of the trumpet.
Amos. And I will cut off the judge from the midst of it,  will kill all the rulers of it with him, says Jehovah.
Amos. Thus says Jehovah: For three transgressions of Judah, yea, for four, I will not turn away the punishment of it, because they have rejected the law of Jehovah,  have not kept his statutes,  their lies have caused them to err, according to which their fathers walked.
Amos. But I will send a fire upon Judah,  it shall devour the palaces of Jerusalem.
Amos. Thus says Jehovah: For three transgressions of Israel, yea, for four, I will not turn away the punishment of it, because they have sold a righteous man for silver,  a needy man for a pair of shoes-
Amos. those who pant after the dust of the earth on the head of the poor,  turn aside the way of the meek. And a man and his father go to the same maiden, to profane my holy name.
Amos. And they lay themselves down beside every altar upon clothes taken in pledge. And in the house of their God they drink the wine of such as have been fined.
Amos. Yet I destroyed the Amorite before them, whose height was like the height of the cedars,  he was strong as the oaks, yet I destroyed his fruit from above,  his roots from beneath.
Amos. Also I brought you up out of the land of Egypt,  led you forty years in the wilderness, to possess the land of the Amorite.
Amos. And I raised up of your sons for prophets,  of your young men for Nazirites. Is it not even thus, O ye sons of Israel? says Jehovah.
Amos. But ye gave the Nazirites wine to drink,  commanded the prophets, saying, Do not Prophesy.
Amos. Behold, I will press you in your place, as a cart presses that is full of sheaves.
Amos. And flight shall perish from the swift,  the strong shall not strengthen his force, nor shall the mighty deliver himself.
Amos. Neither shall he stand who handles the bow. And he who is swift of foot shall not deliver himself, nor shall he who rides the horse deliver himself.
Amos. And he who is courageous among the mighty shall flee away naked in that day, says Jehovah.
Amos. Hear this word that Jehovah has spoken against you, O sons of Israel, against the whole family which I brought up out of the land of Egypt, saying,
Amos. You only I have known of all the families of the earth. Therefore I will visit upon you all your iniquities.
Amos. Shall two walk together unless they have agreed?
Amos. Will a lion roar in the forest, when he has no prey? Will a young lion cry out of his den, if he has taken nothing?
Amos. Can a bird fall in a snare upon the earth, where no net is set for him? Shall a snare spring up from the ground,  have taken nothing at all?
Amos. Shall the trumpet be blown in a city,  the people not be afraid? Shall evil befall a city,  Jehovah has not done it?
Amos. Surely the lord Jehovah will do nothing unless he reveals his secret to his servants the prophets.
Amos. The lion has roared, who will not fear? The lord Jehovah has spoken, who can but prophesy?
Amos. Publish ye in the palaces at Ashdod,  in the palaces in the land of Egypt,  say, Assemble yourselves upon the mountains of Samaria,  behold what great tumults are in it,  what oppressions are in the midst of it.
Amos. For they do not know to do right, says Jehovah, who store up violence and robbery in their palaces.
Amos. Therefore thus says the lord Jehovah: An adversary shall be, even round about the land,  he shall bring down thy strength from thee,  thy palaces shall be plundered.
Amos. Thus says Jehovah: As the shepherd rescues out of the mouth of the lion two legs, or a piece of an ear, so shall the sons of Israel be rescued who sit in Samaria in the corner of a couch,  on the silken cushions of a bed.
Amos. Hear ye,  testify against the house of Jacob, says the lord Jehovah, the God of hosts.
Amos. For in the day that I shall visit the transgressions of Israel upon him, I will also visit the altars of Bethel,  the horns of the altar shall be cut off,  fall to the ground.
Amos. And I will smite the winter house with the summer house,  the houses of ivory shall perish,  the great houses shall have an end, says Jehovah.
Amos. Hear this word, ye cows of Bashan, who are in the mountain of Samaria, who oppress the poor, who crush the needy, who say to their lords, Bring,  let us drink.
Amos. The lord Jehovah has sworn by his holiness, that, lo, the days shall come upon you, that they shall take you away with hooks,  your residue with fish-hooks.
Amos. And ye shall go out at the breaches, each one straight before her,  ye shall cast yourselves into Harmon, says Jehovah.
Amos. Come to Bethel and transgress, to Gilgal and multiply transgression. And bring your sacrifices every morning,  your tithes every three days.
Amos. And offer a sacrifice of thanksgiving of that which is leavened,  proclaim freewill offerings,  publish them. For this pleases you, O ye sons of Israel, says the lord Jehovah.
Amos. And I also have given you cleanness of teeth in all your cities,  want of bread in all your places, yet ye have not returned to me, says Jehovah.
Amos. And I also have withheld the rain from you, when there were yet three months to the harvest. And I caused it to rain upon one city,  caused it not to rain upon another city. One piece was rained upon,  the piece upon which it did not rain withered.
Amos. So two or three cities wandered to one city to drink water,  were not satisfied. Yet ye have not returned to me, says Jehovah.
Amos. I have smitten you with blasting and mildew. The multitude of your gardens and your vineyards and your fig trees and your olive trees the palmer-worm has devoured. Yet ye have not returned to me, says Jehovah.
Amos. I have sent among you the pestilence according to the manner of Egypt. I have slain your young men with the sword,  have carried away your horses,  I have made the stench of your camp to come up even into your nostrils. Yet ye have not returned to me, says Jehovah.
Amos. I have overthrown cities among you, as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah,  ye were as a brand plucked out of the burning. Yet ye have not returned to me, says Jehovah.
Amos. Therefore thus I will do to thee, O Israel,  because I will do this to thee, prepare to meet thy God, O Israel.
Amos. For, lo, he who forms the mountains,  creates the wind,  declares to man what is his thought, who makes the morning darkness,  treads upon the high places of the earth-Jehovah, the God of hosts, is his name.
Amos. Hear ye this word which I take up for a lamentation over you, O house of Israel.
Amos. The virgin of Israel is fallen; she shall no more rise. She is cast down upon her land; there is none to raise her up.
Amos. For thus says the lord Jehovah: The city that went forth a thousand shall have a hundred left,  that which went forth a hundred shall have ten left, to the house of Israel.
Amos. For thus says Jehovah to the house of Israel: Seek ye me,  ye shall live.
Amos. But seek not Bethel, nor enter into Gilgal,  pass not to Beersheba. For Gilgal shall surely go into captivity,  Bethel shall come to naught.
Amos. Seek Jehovah,  ye shall live, lest he break out like fire in the house of Joseph,  it devour,  there be none to quench it in Bethel.
Amos. Ye who turn justice to wormwood,  cast down righteousness to the earth,
Amos. seek him who makes the Pleiades and Orion,  turns the shadow of death into the morning,  makes the day dark with night, who calls for the waters of the sea,  pours them out upon the face of the earth (Jehovah is his name),
Amos. who brings sudden destruction upon the strong, so that destruction comes upon the fortress.
Amos. They hate him who reproves in the gate,  they abhor him who speaks uprightly.
Amos. Inasmuch therefore as ye trample upon the poor,  take exactions of wheat from him. Ye have built houses of hewn stone,  ye shall not dwell in them. Ye have planted pleasant vineyards,  ye shall not drink the wine thereof.
Amos. For I know how manifold are your transgressions,  how mighty are your sins-ye who afflict the just man, who take a bribe,  who turn aside the needy in the gate.
Amos. Therefore he who is prudent shall keep silence in such a time, for it is an evil time.
Amos. Seek good,  not evil, that ye may live,  so Jehovah, the God of hosts, will be with you, as ye say.
Amos. Hate the evil,  love the good,  establish justice in the gate. It may be that Jehovah, the God of hosts, will be gracious to the remnant of Joseph.
Amos. Therefore thus says Jehovah, the God of hosts, the Lord: Wailing shall be in all the broad ways. And they shall say in all the streets, Alas! Alas! And they shall call the husbandman to mourning,  such as are skilful in lamentation to wailing.
Amos. And in all vineyards shall be wailing, for I will pass through the midst of thee, says Jehovah.
Amos. Woe to you who desire the day of Jehovah! Why would ye have the day of Jehovah? It is darkness,  not light.
Amos. As if a man fled from a lion,  a bear met him, or went into the house and leaned his hand on the wall,  a serpent bit him.
Amos. Shall not the day of Jehovah be darkness,  not light, even very dark,  no brightness in it?
Amos. I hate, I despise your feasts,  I will take no delight in your solemn assemblies.
Amos. Yea, though ye offer me your burnt offerings and meal offerings, I will not accept them, nor will I regard the peace offerings of your fat beasts.
Amos. Take thou away from me the noise of thy songs, for I will not hear the melody of thy viols.
Amos. But let justice roll down as waters,  righteousness as a mighty stream.
Amos. Did ye bring sacrifices and offerings to me in the wilderness forty years, O house of Israel?
Amos. Yea, ye have borne the tabernacle of Moloch,  the star of your god Remphan, your images which ye made to yourselves.
Amos. Therefore I will cause you to go into captivity beyond Damascus, says Jehovah, whose name is the God of hosts.
Amos. Woe to those who are at ease in Zion,  to those who are secure in the mountain of Samaria, the notable men of the chief of the nations, to whom the house of Israel come!
Amos. Pass ye to Calneh,  see,  from there go ye to Hamath the great, then go down to Gath of the Philistines. Are they better than these kingdoms? Or is their border greater than your border?
Amos. Ye who put far away the evil day,  cause the seat of violence to come near,
Amos. who lie upon beds of ivory,  stretch themselves upon their couches,  eat the lambs out of the flock,  the calves out of the midst of the stall,
Amos. who sing idle songs to the sound of the viol, who invent for themselves instruments of music, like David,
Amos. who drink wine in bowls,  anoint themselves with the chief oils,  they are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph.
Amos. Therefore they shall now go captive with the first who go captive,  the revelry of those who stretched themselves shall pass away.
Amos. The lord Jehovah has sworn by himself, says Jehovah, the God of hosts: I abhor the excellency of Jacob,  hate his palaces, therefore I will deliver up the city with all that is therein.
Amos. And it shall come to pass, if there remain ten men in one house, that they shall die.
Amos. And when a man's uncle shall take him up, even he who burns him, to bring out the bones out of the house,  shall say to him who is in the innermost parts of the house, Is there yet any with thee? and he shall say, No, then he shall say, Hold thy peace, for we may not make mention of the name of Jehovah.
Amos. For, behold, Jehovah commands,  the great house shall be smitten with breaches,  the little house with clefts.
Amos. Shall horses run upon the rock? Will a man plow there with oxen? That ye have turned justice into gall,  the fruit of righteousness into wormwood,
Amos. ye who rejoice in a thing of nothing, who say, Have we not taken to us horns by our own strength?
Amos. For, behold, I will raise up against you a nation, O house of Israel, says Jehovah, the God of hosts,  they shall afflict you from the entrance of Hamath to the brook of the Arabah.
Amos. Thus the lord Jehovah showed me: And, behold, he formed locusts in the beginning of the shooting up of the latter growth, , lo, it was the latter growth after the king's mowings.
Amos. And it came to pass that, when they made an end of eating the grass of the land, then I said, O lord Jehovah, forgive, I beseech thee. How shall Jacob stand, for he is small?
Amos. Jehovah relented concerning this. It shall not be, says Jehovah.
Amos. Thus the lord Jehovah showed me: And, behold, the lord Jehovah called to contend by fire,  it devoured the great deep,  would have eaten up the land.
Amos. Then I said, O lord Jehovah, cease, I beseech thee. How shall Jacob stand, for he is small?
Amos. Jehovah relented concerning this. This also shall not be, says the lord Jehovah.
Amos. Thus he showed me: And, behold, the Lord stood beside a wall made by a plumb-line, with a plumb-line in his hand.
Amos. And Jehovah said to me, Amos, what do thou see? And I said, A plumb-line. Then the Lord said, Behold, I will set a plumb-line in the midst of my people Israel. I will not again pass by them any more.
Amos. And the high places of Isaac shall be desolate,  the sanctuaries of Israel shall be laid waste,  I will rise against the house of Jeroboam with the sword.
Amos. Then Amaziah the priest of Bethel sent to Jeroboam king of Israel, saying, Amos has conspired against thee in the midst of the house of Israel. The land is not able to bear all his words.
Amos. For thus Amos says: Jeroboam shall die by the sword,  Israel shall surely be led away captive out of his land.
Amos. Also Amaziah said to Amos, O thou seer, go, flee thou away into the land of Judah,  there eat bread,  prophesy there.
Amos. But do not prophesy again any more at Bethel, for it is the king's sanctuary,  it is a royal house.
Amos. Then Amos answered,  said to Amaziah, I was no prophet, nor was I a prophet's son,  I was a herdsman,  a dresser of sycamore trees.
Amos. And Jehovah took me from following the flock,  Jehovah said to me, Go, prophesy to my people Israel.
Amos. Now therefore hear thou the word of Jehovah: Thou say, Do not prophesy against Israel,  do not drop thy word against the house of Isaac.
Amos. Therefore thus says Jehovah: Thy wife shall be a harlot in the city,  thy sons and thy daughters shall fall by the sword,  thy land shall be divided by line,  thou thyself shall die in a land that is unclean. And Israel shall surely be led away captive out of his land.
Amos. Thus the lord Jehovah showed me: And, behold, a basket of summer fruit.
Amos. And he said, Amos, what do thou see? And I said, A basket of summer fruit. Then Jehovah said to me, The end has come upon my people Israel. I will not again pass by them any more.
Amos. And the songs of the temple shall be wailings in that day, says the lord Jehovah. The dead bodies shall be many. In every place they shall cast them forth with silence.
Amos. Hear this, O ye who would swallow up a needy man,  cause the poor of the land to fail,
Amos. saying, When will the new moon be gone, that we may sell grain? And the sabbath, that we may set forth wheat, making the ephah small,  the shekel great,  dealing falsely with balances of deceit,
Amos. that we may buy the poor for silver,  a needy man for a pair of shoes,  sell the refuse of the wheat?
Amos. Jehovah has sworn by the excellency of Jacob, Surely I will never forget any of their works.
Amos. Shall the land not tremble for this,  everyone mourn who dwells therein? Yea, it shall rise up wholly like the River,  it shall be troubled and sink again like the River of Egypt.
Amos. And it shall come to pass in that day, says the lord Jehovah, that I will cause the sun to go down at noon,  I will darken the earth in the clear day.
Amos. And I will turn your feasts into mourning,  all your songs into lamentation. And I will bring sackcloth upon all loins,  baldness upon every head,  I will make it as the mourning for an only son,  the end thereof as a bitter day.
Amos. Behold, the days come, says the lord Jehovah, that I will send a famine in the land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water,  of hearing the words of Jehovah.
Amos. And they shall wander from sea to sea,  from the north even to the east. They shall run to and fro to seek the word of Jehovah,  shall not find it.
Amos. In that day the fair virgins and the young men shall faint for thirst.
Amos. Those who swear by the sin of Samaria,  say, As thy god, O Dan, lives, , As the way of Beersheba lives, they shall fall,  never rise up again.
Amos. I saw the Lord standing beside the altar. And he said, Smite the capitals, that the thresholds may shake,  break them in pieces on the head of all of them,  I will kill the last of them with the sword. There shall not one of them flee away,  there shall not one of them escape.
Amos. Though they dig into Sheol, from there my hand shall take them,  though they climb up to heaven, from there I will bring them down.
Amos. And though they hide themselves on the top of Carmel, I will search and take them out from there. And though they be hid from my sight in the bottom of the sea, from there I will command the serpent,  it shall bite them.
Amos. And though they go into captivity before their enemies, from there I will command the sword,  it shall kill them. And I will set my eyes upon them for evil,  not for good.
Amos. For the Lord, Jehovah of hosts, is he who touches the land and it melts,  all who dwell therein shall mourn. And it shall rise up wholly like the River,  shall sink again like the River of Egypt.
Amos. He who builds his chambers in the heavens,  has founded his vault upon the earth, he who calls for the waters of the sea,  pours them out upon the face of the earth, Jehovah is his name.
Amos. Are ye not as the sons of the Ethiopians to me, O sons of Israel? says Jehovah. Have I not brought up Israel out of the land of Egypt,  the Philistines from Caphtor,  the Syrians from Kir?
Amos. Behold, the eyes of the lord Jehovah are upon the sinful kingdom,  I will destroy it from off the face of the earth, except that I will not utterly destroy the house of Jacob, says Jehovah.
Amos. For, lo, I will command,  I will sift the house of Israel among all the nations, just as grain is sifted in a sieve, yet the least kernel shall not fall upon the earth.
Amos. All the sinners of my people shall die by the sword, who say, The evil shall not overtake nor meet us.
Amos. In that day I will raise up the tabernacle of David that is fallen,  close up the breaches thereof. And I will raise up its ruins,  I will build it as in the days of old,
Amos. that they may possess the remnant of Edom,  all the nations that are called by my name, says Jehovah who does this.
Amos. Behold, the days come, says Jehovah, that the plowman shall overtake the reaper,  the treader of grapes him who sows seed,  the mountains shall drop sweet wine,  all the hills shall melt.
Amos. And I will bring back the captivity of my people Israel,  they shall build the waste cities,  inhabit them,  they shall plant vineyards,  drink the wine of it. They shall also make gardens,  eat the fruit of them.
Amos. And I will plant them upon their land,  they shall no more be plucked up out of their land which I have given them, says Jehovah thy God.
Obadiah
Obad. The vision of Obadiah. Thus says the lord Jehovah concerning Edom: We have heard tidings from Jehovah,  an ambassador is sent among the nations, saying, Arise ye,  let us rise up against her in battle.
Obad. Behold, I have made thee small among the nations. Thou are greatly despised.
Obad. The pride of thy heart has deceived thee, O thou who dwell in the clefts of the rock, whose habitation is high, who says in his heart, Who shall bring me down to the ground?
Obad. Though thou mount on high as the eagle,  though thy nest be set among the stars, I will bring thee down from there, says Jehovah.
Obad. If thieves came to thee, if robbers by night (how thou are cut off!), would they not steal only till they had enough? If grape gatherers came to thee, would they not leave some gleaning grapes?
Obad. How are the things of Esau searched! How are his hidden treasures sought out!
Obad. All the men of thy confederacy have brought thee on thy way, even to the border. The men who were at peace with thee have deceived thee,  prevailed against thee. Those who eat thy bread lay a snare under thee. There is no understanding in him.
Obad. Shall I not in that day, says Jehovah, destroy the wise men out of Edom,  understanding out of the mount of Esau?
Obad. And thy mighty men, O Teman, shall be dismayed, to the end that everyone may be cut off from the mount of Esau by slaughter.
Obad. Shame shall cover thee for the violence done to thy brother Jacob,  thou shall be cut off forever.
Obad. In the day that thou stood on the other side, in the day that strangers carried away his substance,  foreigners entered into his gates,  cast lots upon Jerusalem, even thou were as one of them.
Obad. But look not thou on the day of thy brother in the day of his disaster,  rejoice not over the sons of Judah in the day of their destruction, nor speak proudly in the day of distress.
Obad. Enter not into the gate of my people in the day of their calamity. Yea, look not thou on their affliction in the day of their calamity, nor lay ye hands on their substance in the day of their calamity.
Obad. And stand thou not in the crossway, to cut off those of his who escape,  deliver not up those of his who remain in the day of distress.
Obad. For the day of Jehovah is near upon all the nations. As thou have done, it shall be done to thee. Thy dealing shall return upon thine own head.
Obad. For as ye have drunk upon my holy mountain, so shall all the nations drink continually. Yea, they shall drink,  swallow down,  shall be as though they had not been.
Obad. But in mount Zion there shall be those who escape,  it shall be holy,  the house of Jacob shall possess their possessions.
Obad. And the house of Jacob shall be a fire,  the house of Joseph a flame,  the house of Esau for stubble. And they shall burn among them,  devour them,  there shall not be any remaining to the house of Esau, for Jehovah has spoken it.
Obad. And those of the South shall possess the mount of Esau,  those of the lowland the Philistines. And they shall possess the field of Ephraim,  the field of Samaria,  Benjamin shall possess Gilead.
Obad. And the captives of this host of the sons of Israel, who are among the Canaanites, shall possess even to Zarephath. And the captives of Jerusalem who are in Sepharad shall possess the cities of the South.
Obad. And saviors shall come up on mount Zion to judge the mount of Esau,  the kingdom shall be Jehovah's.
Jonah
Jonah. Now the word of Jehovah came to Jonah the son of Amittai, saying,
Jonah. Arise, go to Nineveh, that great city,  cry against it, for their wickedness has come up before me.
Jonah. But Jonah rose up to flee to Tarshish from the presence of Jehovah. And he went down to Joppa,  found a ship going to Tarshish. So he paid the fare of it,  went down into it, to go with them to Tarshish from the presence of Jehovah.
Jonah. But Jehovah sent out a great wind upon the sea,  there was a mighty tempest on the sea, so that the ship was about to be broken.
Jonah. Then the mariners were afraid,  cried every man to his god. And they cast forth the wares that were in the ship into the sea, to lighten it to them. But Jonah was gone down into the innermost parts of the ship,  he lay,  was fast asleep.
Jonah. So the shipmaster came to him,  said to him, What do thou mean, O sleeper? Arise, call upon thy God, if so be that God will think upon us, that we not perish.
Jonah. And they said every one to his fellow, Come,  let us cast lots, that we may know for whose cause this evil is upon us. So they cast lots,  the lot fell upon Jonah.
Jonah. Then they said to him, Tell us, we pray thee, for whose cause this evil is upon us. What is thine occupation? And from where do thou come? What is thy country,  of what people are thou?
Jonah. And he said to them, I am a Hebrew,  I fear Jehovah, the God of heaven, who has made the sea and the dry land.
Jonah. Then the men were exceedingly afraid,  said to him, What is this that thou have done? For the men knew that he was fleeing from the presence of Jehovah, because he had told them.
Jonah. Then they said to him, What shall we do to thee, that the sea may be calm to us? For the sea grew more and more tempestuous.
Jonah. And he said to them, Take me up,  cast me forth into the sea, so shall the sea be calm to you. For I know that for my sake this great tempest is upon you.
Jonah. Nevertheless the men rowed hard to get themselves back to the land,  they could not, for the sea grew more and more tempestuous against them.
Jonah. Therefore they cried to Jehovah,  said, We beseech thee, O Jehovah, we beseech thee, let us not perish for this man's life,  lay not upon us innocent blood. For thou, O Jehovah, have done as it pleased thee.
Jonah. So they took up Jonah,  cast him forth into the sea,  the sea ceased from its raging.
Jonah. Then the men feared Jehovah exceedingly,  they offered a sacrifice to Jehovah,  made vows.
Jonah. And Jehovah prepared a great sea creature to swallow up Jonah,  Jonah was in the belly of the sea creature three days and three nights.
Jonah. Then Jonah prayed to Jehovah his God out of the sea creatures belly.
Jonah. And he said, I called because of my affliction to Jehovah,  he answered me. Out of the belly of Sheol I cried,  thou heard my voice.
Jonah. For thou cast me into the depth, in the heart of the seas,  the flood was round about me. All thy waves and thy billows passed over me.
Jonah. And I said, I am cast out from before thine eyes. Yet I will look again toward thy holy temple.
Jonah. The waters encompassed me around, even to the soul. The deep was round about me. The weeds were wrapped around my head.
Jonah. I went down to the bottoms of the mountains. The earth with its bars closed upon me forever. Yet thou have brought up my life from the pit, O Jehovah my God.
Jonah. When my soul fainted within me, I remembered Jehovah. And my prayer came in to thee, into thy holy temple.
Jonah. Those who regard lying vanities forsake their own mercy.
Jonah. But I will sacrifice to thee with the voice of thanksgiving. I will pay that which I have vowed. Salvation is of Jehovah.
Jonah. And Jehovah spoke to the sea creature,  it vomited Jonah out upon the dry land.
Jonah. And the word of Jehovah came to Jonah the second time, saying,
Jonah. Arise, go to Nineveh, that great city,  preach to it the preaching that I bid thee.
Jonah. So Jonah arose,  went to Nineveh, according to the word of Jehovah. Now Nineveh was an exceedingly great city, of three days' journey.
Jonah. And Jonah began to enter into the city a day's journey. And he cried out,  said, Yet forty days,  Nineveh shall be overthrown.
Jonah. And the people of Nineveh believed God,  they proclaimed a fast,  put on sackcloth, from the greatest of them even to the least of them.
Jonah. And the news reached the king of Nineveh,  he arose from his throne,  laid his robe from him,  covered himself with sackcloth,  sat in ashes.
Jonah. And he made proclamation and published through Nineveh by the decree of the king and his nobles, saying, Let neither man nor beast, herd nor flock, taste anything. Let them not feed, nor drink water,
Jonah. but let them be covered with sackcloth, both man and beast,  let them cry mightily to God. Yea, let them turn each one from his evil way,  from the violence that is in his hands.
Jonah. Who knows whether God will not turn and relent,  turn away from his fierce anger, that we not perish?
Jonah. And God saw their works, that they turned from their evil way. And God relented of the evil which he said he would do to them,  he did not do it.
Jonah. But it displeased Jonah exceedingly,  he was angry.
Jonah. And he prayed to Jehovah,  said, I pray thee, O Jehovah, was not this my saying, when I was yet in my country? Therefore I hastened to flee to Tarshish, for I knew that thou are a gracious God,  merciful, slow to anger,  abundant in loving kindness,  relent thee of the evil.
Jonah. Therefore now, O Jehovah, I beseech thee, take my life from me, for it is better for me to die than to live.
Jonah. And Jehovah said, Do thou well to be angry?
Jonah. Then Jonah went out of the city,  sat on the east side of the city,  there made himself a booth,  sat under it in the shade, till he might see what would become of the city.
Jonah. And Jehovah God prepared a gourd,  made it to come up over Jonah, that it might be a shade over his head, to deliver him from his misery. So Jonah was very glad because of the gourd.
Jonah. But God prepared a worm when the morning rose the next day,  it smote the gourd, that it withered.
Jonah. And it came to pass, when the sun arose, that God prepared a sultry east wind,  the sun beat upon the head of Jonah, that he fainted,  requested for himself that he might die,  said, It is better for me to die than to live.
Jonah. And God said to Jonah, Do thou well to be angry for the gourd? And he said, I do well to be angry, even to death.
Jonah. And Jehovah said, Thou have had regard for the gourd, for which thou have not labored, nor made it grow, which came up in a night,  perished in a night.
Jonah. And should not I have regard for Nineveh, that great city, in which are more than one hundred and twenty thousand men who cannot discern between their right hand and their left hand,  also much cattle?
Micah
The word of Jehovah that came to Micah the Morashtite in the days of Jotham, Ahaz,  Hezekiah, kings of Judah, which he saw concerning Samaria and Jerusalem.
Hear, ye peoples, all of you. Hearken, O earth,  all who are in it,  let the Lord Jehovah be witness against you, the Lord from his holy temple.
For, behold, Jehovah comes forth out of his place,  will come down,  tread upon the high places of the earth.
the mountains shall be melted under him,  the valleys shall be split, as wax before the fire, as waters that are poured down a steep place.
All this is for the transgression of Jacob,  for the sins of the house of Israel. What is the transgression of Jacob? Is it not Samaria? And what are the high places of Judah? Are they not Jerusalem?
Therefore I will make Samaria as a heap of the field,  as places for planting vineyards. And I will pour down the stones of it into the valley,  I will uncover the foundations of it.
all her graven images shall be beaten to pieces. And all her wages shall be burned with fire,  I will lay desolate all her idols. For she has gathered them from the wages of a harlot,  to the wage of a harlot they shall return.
For this I will lament and wail. I will go stripped and naked. I will make a wailing like the jackals,  a lamentation like the ostriches.
For her wounds are incurable. For it has come even to Judah. it reaches to the gate of my people, even to Jerusalem.
Tell it not in Gath. Weep not at all. I have rolled myself in the dust at Beth-le-aphrah.
Pass away, O inhabitant of Shaphir, in nakedness and shame. The inhabitant of Zaanan has not come forth. The wailing of Beth-ezel shall take from you the stay of it.
For the inhabitant of Maroth waits anxiously for good, because evil has come down from Jehovah to the gate of Jerusalem.
Bind the chariot to the swift steed, O inhabitant of Lachish. She was the beginning of sin to the daughter of Zion, for the transgressions of Israel were found in thee.
Therefore thou shall give a parting gift to Moresheth-gath. The houses of Achzib shall be a deceitful thing to the kings of Israel.
I will yet bring to thee, O inhabitant of Mareshah, him who shall possess thee. The glory of Israel shall come even to Adullam.
Make thee bald,  cut off thy hair for the sons of thy delight. Enlarge thy baldness as the vulture, for they have gone into captivity from thee.
Woe to those who devise iniquity and work evil upon their beds! When the morning is light they practice it, because it is in the power of their hand.
they covet fields,  seize them,  houses,  take them away. And they oppress a man and his house, even a man and his heritage.
Therefore thus says Jehovah: Behold, I devise an evil against this family, from which ye shall not remove your necks, nor shall ye walk haughtily, for it is an evil time.
In that day they shall take up a taunt against you,  lament with a doleful lamentation. And say, We are utterly ruined. He changes the portion of my people. How he removes it from me! He divides our fields to the rebellious.
Therefore thou shall have nobody to cast the line by lot in the assembly of Jehovah.
Prophesy ye not, they prophesy. They shall not prophesy to these, so reproaches shall not depart.
Shall it be said, O house of Jacob, Is the Spirit of Jehovah restricted? Are these his doings? Do not my words do good to him who walks uprightly?
But of late my people have risen up as an enemy. Ye strip off the robe with the garment from those who pass by securely as men turning back from war.
Ye cast out the women of my people from their pleasant houses. Ye take away my glory from their young sons forever.
Arise ye,  depart, for this is not your resting-place, because of uncleanness that destroys, even with a grievous destruction.
If a man walking in a spirit of falsehood lies, saying, I will prophesy to thee of wine and of strong drink, he shall even be the prophet of this people.
I will surely assemble, O Jacob, all of thee. I will surely gather the remnant of Israel. I will put them together as the sheep of Bozrah, as a flock in the midst of their pasture. They shall make great noise because of the multitude of men.
The breaker has gone up before them. They have broken forth and passed on to the gate,  have gone out there. And their king has passed on before them,  Jehovah at the head of them.
I said, Hear, I pray you, ye heads of Jacob,  rulers of the house of Israel. Is it not for you to know justice?
Ye who hate the good,  love the evil, who pluck off their skin from off them,  their flesh from off their bones,
who also eat the flesh of my people,  flay their skin from off them,  break their bones,  chop them in pieces, as for the pot,  as flesh within the caldron.
Then they shall cry to Jehovah,  he will not answer them. Yea, he will hide his face from them at that time, according as they have wrought evil in their doings.
Thus says Jehovah concerning the prophets who make my people to err, who bite with their teeth,  cry, Peace. And he who does not put into their mouths, they even prepare war against him.
Therefore it shall be night to you, that ye shall have no vision. And it shall be dark to you, that ye shall not divine. And the sun shall go down upon the prophets,  the day shall be black over them.
the seers shall be put to shame,  the diviners confounded. Yea, they shall all cover their lips, for there is no answer from God.
But as for me, I am full of power by the Spirit of Jehovah,  of judgment,  of might, to declare to Jacob his transgression,  to Israel his sin.
Hear this, I pray you, ye heads of the house of Jacob,  rulers of the house of Israel, who abhor justice,  pervert all equity.
They build up Zion with blood,  Jerusalem with iniquity.
The heads of it judge for a bribe,  the priests of it teach for a wage,  the prophets of it divine for money. Yet they lean upon Jehovah,  say, Is not Jehovah in the midst of us? No evil shall come upon us.
Therefore for your sake Zion shall be plowed as a field,  Jerusalem shall become heaps,  the mountain of the house as the high places of a forest.
But in the latter days it shall come to pass, that the mountain of Jehovah's house shall be established on the top of the mountains,  it shall be exalted above the hills,  peoples shall flow to it.
many nations shall go and say, Come ye,  let us go up to the mountain of Jehovah,  to the house of the God of Jacob,  he will teach us of his ways,  we will walk in his paths. For out of Zion shall go forth the law,  the word of Jehovah from Jerusalem.
he will judge between many peoples,  will decide concerning strong nations afar off. And they shall beat their swords into plowshares,  their spears into pruning-hooks. Nation shall not lift up sword against nation, nor shall they learn war any more.
But they shall sit every man under his vine and under his fig tree,  none shall make them afraid. For the mouth of Jehovah of hosts has spoken it.
For all the peoples walk each one in the name of his god. And we will walk in the name of Jehovah our God forever and ever.
In that day, says Jehovah, I will assemble that which is lame,  I will gather that which is driven away,  that which I have afflicted.
I will make that which was lame a remnant,  that which was cast far off a strong nation. And Jehovah will reign over them in mount Zion from henceforth even forever.
thou, O tower of the flock, the hill of the daughter of Zion, to thee it shall come. Yea, the former dominion shall come, the kingdom of the daughter of Jerusalem.
Now why do thou cry out aloud? Is there no king in thee? Has thy counselor perished, that pangs have taken hold of thee as of a woman in travail?
Be in pain,  labor to bring forth, O daughter of Zion, like a woman in travail. For now thou shall go forth out of the city,  shall dwell in the field,  shall come even to Babylon. There thou shall be rescued. There Jehovah will redeem thee from the hand of thine enemies.
now many nations are assembled against thee, who say, Let her be defiled,  let our eye see our desire upon Zion.
But they know not the thoughts of Jehovah, nor do they understand his counsel, for he has gathered them as the sheaves to the threshing-floor.
Arise and thresh, O daughter of Zion, for I will make thy horn iron,  I will make thy hoofs brass,  thou shall beat many peoples in pieces. And I will devote their gain to Jehovah,  their substance to the Lord of the whole earth.
Now thou shall gather thyself in troops, O daughter of troops. He has laid siege against us. They shall smite the judge of Israel with a rod upon the cheek.
But thou, Bethlehem Ephrathah, which are little to be among the thousands of Judah, out of thee he shall come forth to me who is to be ruler in Israel, whose goings forth are from of old, from everlasting.
Therefore he will give them up until the time that she who travails has brought forth. Then the residue of his brothers shall return to the sons of Israel.
he shall stand,  shall feed his flock in the strength of Jehovah, in the majesty of the name of Jehovah his God,  they shall abide. For now he shall be great to the ends of the earth.
this man shall be our peace. When the Assyrian shall come into our land,  when he shall tread in our palaces, then we shall raise against him seven shepherds,  eight principal men.
they shall waste the land of Assyria with the sword,  the land of Nimrod in the entrances of it. And he shall deliver us from the Assyrian, when he comes into our land,  when he treads within our border.
the remnant of Jacob shall be in the midst of many peoples as dew from Jehovah, as showers upon the grass, that tarry not for man, nor wait for the sons of men.
the remnant of Jacob shall be among the nations, in the midst of many peoples, as a lion among the beasts of the forest, as a young lion among the flocks of sheep, who, if he goes through, treads down and tears in pieces,  there is none to deliver.
Let thy hand be lifted up above thine adversaries,  let all thine enemies be cut off.
it shall come to pass in that day, says Jehovah, that I will cut off thy horses out of the midst of thee,  will destroy thy chariots,
I will cut off the cities of thy land,  will throw down all thy strongholds.
I will cut off witchcrafts out of thy hand,  thou shall have no more soothsayers.
I will cut off thy graven images and thy pillars out of the midst of thee,  thou shall no more worship the work of thy hands.
I will pluck up thine Asherim out of the midst of thee,  I will destroy thy cities.
I will execute vengeance in anger and wrath upon the nations that did not hearken.
Hear ye now what Jehovah says: Arise, contend thou before the mountains,  let the hills hear thy voice.
Hear, O ye mountains, Jehovah's controversy,  ye enduring foundations of the earth, for Jehovah has a controversy with his people,  he will contend with Israel.
O my people, what have I done to thee? And in what have I wearied thee? Testify against me.
For I brought thee up out of the land of Egypt,  redeemed thee out of the house of bondage. And I sent before thee Moses, Aaron,  Miriam.
O my people, remember now what Balak king of Moab devised,  what Balaam the son of Beor answered him. Remember from Shittim to Gilgal, that ye may know the righteous acts of Jehovah.
With what shall I come before Jehovah,  bow myself before the high God? Shall I come before him with burnt offerings, with calves a year old?
Will Jehovah be pleased with thousands of rams, or with ten thousand rivers of oil? Shall I give my firstborn for my transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?
He has shown thee, O man, what is good. And what does Jehovah require of thee,  to do justly,  to love kindness,  to walk humbly with thy God?
The voice of Jehovah cries to the city,  the man of wisdom will see thy name. Hear ye the rod,  who has appointed it.
Are there yet treasures of wickedness in the house of the wicked,  a scant measure that is abominable?
Shall I be pure with wicked balances,  with a bag of deceitful weights?
For the rich men of it are full of violence,  the inhabitants of it have spoken lies,  their tongue is deceitful in their mouth.
Therefore I also have smitten thee with a grievous wound, I have made thee desolate because of thy sins.
Thou shall eat,  not be satisfied,  thy humiliation shall be in the midst of thee. And thou shall put away,  shall not save,  that which thou save I will give up to the sword.
Thou shall sow,  shall not reap, thou shall tread the olives,  shall not anoint thee with oil,  the vintage,  shall not drink the wine.
For the statutes of Omri are kept,  all the works of the house of Ahab,  ye walk in their counsels, that I may make thee a desolation,  the inhabitants thereof a hissing. And ye shall bear the reproach of my people.
Woe is me! For I am as when they have gathered the summer fruits, as the grape gleanings of the vintage. There is no cluster to eat. My soul desires the first ripe fig.
The devout man has perished out of the earth,  there is none upright among men. They all lie in wait for blood. They hunt every man his brother with a net.
Their hands are upon that which is evil to do it diligently. The ruler asks,  the judge asks for a bribe. And the great man, he utters the evil desire of his soul. Thus they weave it together.
The best of them is as a brier. The most upright is worse than a thorn hedge. The day of thy watchmen, even thy visitation, has come. Now shall be their perplexity.
Trust ye not in a neighbor. Put ye not confidence in a friend. Keep the doors of thy mouth from her who lies in thy bosom.
For the son dishonors the father. The daughter rises up against her mother, the daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law. A man's enemies are the men of his own house.
But as for me, I will look to Jehovah. I will wait for the God of my salvation. My God will hear me.
Rejoice not against me, O my enemy. When I fall, I shall arise. When I sit in darkness, Jehovah will be a light to me.
I will bear the indignation of Jehovah, because I have sinned against him, until he pleads my case,  executes judgment for me. He will bring me forth to the light,  I shall behold his righteousness.
Then my enemy shall see it,  shame shall cover her who said to me, Where is Jehovah thy God? My eyes shall see my desire upon her. Now she shall be trodden down as the mire of the streets.
A day for building thy walls! In that day the decree shall be far removed.
In that day they shall come to thee from Assyria and the cities of Egypt,  from Egypt even to the River,  from sea to sea,  mountain to mountain.
Yet the land shall be desolate because of those who dwell therein, for the fruit of their doings.
Feed thy people with thy rod, the flock of thy heritage, which dwell solitarily in the forest in the midst of Carmel. Let them feed in Bashan and Gilead, as in the days of old.
As in the days of thy coming forth out of the land of Egypt I will show marvelous things to them.
The nations shall see and be ashamed of all their might. They shall lay their hand upon their mouth. Their ears shall be deaf.
They shall lick the dust like a serpent. Like crawling things of the earth they shall come trembling out of their close places. They shall come with fear to Jehovah our God,  shall be afraid because of thee.
Who is a God like to thee, who pardons iniquity,  passes over the transgression of the remnant of his heritage? He does not retain his anger forever, because he delights in loving kindness.
He will again have compassion upon us. He will tread our iniquities under foot,  thou will cast all their sins into the depths of the sea.
Thou will perform the truth to Jacob,  the loving kindness to Abraham, which thou have sworn to our fathers from the days of old.
Nahum
The burden of Nineveh. The book of the vision of Nahum the Elkoshite.
Jehovah is a jealous God and avenges. Jehovah avenges and is full of wrath. Jehovah takes vengeance on his adversaries,  he reserves wrath for his enemies.
Jehovah is slow to anger,  great in power,  will by no means clear the guilty. Jehovah has his way in the whirlwind and in the storm,  the clouds are the dust of his feet.
He rebukes the sea,  makes it dry,  dries up all the rivers. Bashan languishes,  Carmel,  the flower of Lebanon languishes.
The mountains quake at him,  the hills melt,  the earth is up heaved at his presence. Yea, the world,  all who dwell therein.
Who can stand before his indignation? And who can abide in the fierceness of his anger? His wrath is poured out like fire,  the rocks are broken apart by him.
Jehovah is good, a stronghold in the day of trouble,  he knows those who take refuge in him.
But with an over running flood he will make a full end of her place,  will pursue his enemies into darkness.
What do ye devise against Jehovah? He will make a full end. Affliction shall not rise up the second time.
For entangled like thorns,  drunken as with their drink, they are consumed utterly as dry stubble.
He has gone forth out of thee, who devises evil against Jehovah, who counsels wickedness.
Thus says Jehovah: Though they be in full strength,  likewise many, even so they shall be cut down. And he shall pass away. Though I have afflicted thee, I will afflict thee no more.
now I will break his yoke from off thee,  will burst thy bonds apart.
Jehovah has given commandment concerning thee, that no more of thy name be sown. Out of the house of thy gods I will cut off the graven image and the molten image. I will make thy grave, for thou are vile.
Behold, upon the mountains the feet of him who brings good news, who publishes peace! Keep thy feasts, O Judah. Perform thy vows, for the wicked one shall no more pass through thee. He is utterly cut off.
He who dashes in pieces has come up against thee. Keep the fortress. Watch the way. Make thy loins strong. Fortify thy power mightily.
For Jehovah restores the excellency of Jacob, as the excellency of Israel, for the emptiers have emptied them out,  destroyed their vine-branches.
The shield of his mighty men is made red. The valiant men are in scarlet. The chariots flash with steel in the day of his preparation,  the cypress spears are brandished.
The chariots rage in the streets; they rush to and fro in the broad ways. The appearance of them is like torches. They run like the lightnings.
He remembers his nobles. They stumble in their march. They make haste to the wall of it,  the mantelet is prepared.
The gates of the rivers are opened,  the palace is dissolved.
it is decreed. She is uncovered. She is carried away,  her handmaids moan as with the voice of doves, beating upon their breasts.
But Nineveh has been from of old like a pool of water. Yet they flee away. Stand, stand, they cry,  none looks back.
Take ye the spoil of silver. Take the spoil of gold. For there is no end of the store, the glory of all goodly furniture.
She is empty,  void,  waste. And the heart melts,  the knees smite together,  anguish is in all loins,  the faces of them all have grown pale.
Where is the den of the lions,  the feeding-place of the young lions, where the lion and the lioness walked, the lion's whelp,  none made them afraid?
The lion tore in pieces enough for his whelps,  strangled for his lionesses,  filled his caves with prey,  his dens with prey.
Behold, I am against thee, says Jehovah of hosts,  I will burn her chariots in the smoke,  the sword shall devour thy young lions. And I will cut off thy prey from the earth,  the voice of thy messengers shall no more be heard.
Woe to the bloody city! It is all full of lies and rapine. The prey departs not.
The noise of the whip,  the noise of the rattling of wheels,  prancing horses,  bounding chariots,
the horseman mounting,  the flashing sword,  the glittering spear,  a multitude of slain,  a great heap of corpses,  there is no end of the bodies. They stumble upon their bodies,
because of the multitude of the whoredoms of the well-favored harlot, the mistress of witchcrafts, who sells nations through her whoredoms,  families through her witchcrafts.
Behold, I am against thee, says Jehovah of hosts,  I will uncover thy skirts upon thy face,  I will show the nations thy nakedness,  the kingdoms thy shame.
I will cast abominable filth upon thee,  make thee vile,  will set thee as a gazing-stock.
it shall come to pass, that all those who look upon thee shall flee from thee,  say, Nineveh is laid waste. Who will bemoan her? From where shall I seek comforters for thee?
Are thou better than No-amon, that was situated among the rivers, that had the waters round about her, whose rampart was the sea,  her wall was of the sea?
Ethiopia and Egypt were her strength,  it was infinite. Put and Lubim were thy helpers.
Yet she was carried away. She went into captivity. Her young sons also were dashed in pieces at the head of all the streets. And they cast lots for her honorable men,  all her great men were bound in chains.
Thou also shall be drunken. Thou shall be hid. Thou also shall seek a stronghold because of the enemy.
All thy fortresses shall be like fig trees with the first ripe figs. If they be shaken, they fall into the mouth of the eater.
Behold, thy people in the midst of thee are women. The gates of thy land are set wide open to thine enemies. The fire has devoured thy bars.
Draw thee water for the siege. Strengthen thy fortresses. Go into the clay,  tread the mortar. Make strong the brick kiln.
There the fire shall devour thee. The sword shall cut thee off. It shall devour thee like the canker-worm. Make thyself many as the canker-worm. Make thyself many as the locust.
Thou have multiplied thy merchants above the stars of heaven. The canker-worm ravages,  flees away.
Thy rulers are as the locusts,  thy marshals as the swarms of grasshoppers, which encamp in the hedges in the cold day,  when the sun arises they flee away,  their place is not known where they are.
Thy shepherds slumber, O king of Assyria. Thy nobles are at rest. Thy people are scattered upon the mountains,  there is none to gather them.
There is no assuaging of thy hurt. Thy wound is grievous. All who hear the report of thee clap their hands over thee, for upon whom has not thy wickedness passed continually?
Habakkuk
The burden which Habakkuk the prophet saw.
O Jehovah, how long shall I cry,  thou will not hear? I cry out to thee of violence,  thou will not save.
Why do thou show me iniquity,  look upon perverseness? For destruction and violence are before me,  there is strife,  contention rises up.
Therefore the law is slacked,  justice never goes forth. For the wicked man surrounds the righteous man, therefore justice goes forth perverted.
Behold ye scoffers,  look,  wonder marvelously. For I am working a work in your days, which ye will not believe though it be told you.
For, lo, I raise up the Chaldeans, that bitter and hasty nation, who march through the breadth of the earth to possess dwelling-places that are not theirs.
They are fearful and dreadful. Their judgment and their dignity proceed from themselves.
Their horses also are swifter than leopards,  are more fierce than the evening wolves. And their horsemen press proudly on. Yea, their horsemen come from far. They fly as an eagle that hastens to devour.
They come all of them for violence. The set of their faces is forwards,  they gather captives as the sand.
Yea, he scoffs at kings,  rulers are a derision to him. He derides every stronghold, for he heaps up dust,  takes it.
Then he shall sweep by as a wind,  shall pass over,  be guilty; he whose might is his god.
Are not thou from everlasting, O Jehovah my God, my Holy One? We shall not die. O Jehovah, thou have ordained him for judgment,  thou, O Rock, have established him for correction.
Thou who are of purer eyes than to behold evil,  who cannot look on perverseness, why do thou look upon those who deal treacherously,  hold thy peace when the wicked man swallows up the man who is more righteous than he,
makes men as the fishes of the sea, as the creeping things, that have no ruler over them?
He takes all of them up with the hook. He catches them in his net,  gathers them in his drag. Therefore he rejoices and is glad.
Therefore he sacrifices to his net,  burns incense to his drag, because by them his portion is fat,  his food plentiful.
Shall he therefore empty his net,  not spare to kill the nations continually?
I will stand upon my watch,  set myself upon the tower,  will look forth to see what he will speak with me,  what I shall answer concerning my complaint.
Jehovah answered me,  said, Write the vision,  make it plain upon tablets, that he may run who reads it.
For the vision is yet for the appointed time,  it hastens toward the end,  shall not lie. Though it tarry, wait for it, because it will surely come. It will not delay.
Behold, his soul is puffed up; it is not upright in him. (But the righteous man shall live by his faith.
Yea, moreover, wine is treacherous.) He is a haughty man, who does not keep at home, who enlarges his desire as Sheol,  he is as death,  cannot be satisfied,  gathers to him all nations,  heaps to him all peoples.
Shall not all these take up a derision against him,  a taunting proverb against him,  say, Woe to him who increases that which is not his (how long?) and who loads himself with pledges!
Shall they not rise up suddenly that shall bite thee,  awake that shall vex thee. And thou shall be for booty to them?
Because thou have plundered many nations, all the remnant of the peoples shall plunder thee, because of men's blood,  for the violence done to the land, to the city and to all who dwell therein.
Woe to him who gets an evil gain for his house, that he may set his nest on high, that he may be delivered from the hand of evil!
Thou have devised shame to thy house, by cutting off many peoples,  have sinned against thy soul.
For the stone shall cry out of the wall,  the beam out of the timber shall answer it.
Woe to him who builds a town with blood,  establishes a city by iniquity!
Behold, is it not of Jehovah of hosts that the peoples labor for the fire,  the nations weary themselves for vanity?
For the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory of Jehovah, as the waters cover the sea.
Woe to him who gives his neighbor drink, who adds thy venom,  also makes him drunken, that thou may look on their nakedness!
Thou are filled with shame,  not glory. Drink thou also,  be as one uncircumcised. The cup of Jehovah's right hand shall come around to thee,  foul shame shall be upon thy glory.
For the violence done to Lebanon shall cover thee and the plunder of the beasts (which made them afraid), because of men's blood,  for the violence done to the land, to the city and to all who dwell therein.
What profits the graven image, that the maker of it has engraved it, the molten image, even the teacher of lies, that he who fashions its form trusts in it, to make dumb idols?
Woe to him who says to the wood, Awake, to the dumb stone, Arise! Shall this teach? Behold, it is overlaid with gold and silver,  there is no breath at all in the midst of it.
But Jehovah is in his holy temple. Let all the earth keep silence before him.
A prayer of Habakkuk the prophet, set to Shigionoth.
O Jehovah, I have heard the report of thee,  am afraid. O Jehovah, revive thy work in the midst of the years. In the midst of the years make it known. In wrath remember mercy.
God came from Teman,  the Holy One from mount Paran. Selah. His glory covered the heavens,  the earth was full of his praise.
his brightness was as the light. He had rays from his hand,  there was the hiding of his power.
Before him went the pestilence. And fiery bolts went forth at his feet.
He stood,  measured the earth. He beheld,  drove apart the nations. And the eternal mountains were scattered. The everlasting hills bowed. His goings were as of old.
I saw the tents of Cushan in affliction. The curtains of the land of Midian trembled.
Was Jehovah displeased with the rivers? Was thine anger against the rivers, or thy wrath against the sea, that thou rode upon thy horses, upon thy chariots of salvation?
Thy bow was made quite bare. The oaths to the tribes were a sure word. Selah. Thou split the earth with rivers.
The mountains saw thee,  were afraid. The tempest of waters passed by. The deep uttered its voice,  lifted up its hands on high.
The sun and moon stood still in their habitation, at the light of thine arrows as they went, at the shining of thy glittering spear.
Thou marched though the land in indignation. Thou threshed the nations in anger.
Thou went forth for the salvation of thy people, for the salvation of thine anointed. Thou wound the head out of the house of the wicked man, laying bare the foundation even to the neck. Selah.
Thou pierced with his own staves the head of his warriors. They came as a whirlwind to scatter me. Their rejoicing was as to devour the poor man secretly.
Thou walked through the sea with thy horses, the heap of mighty waters.
I heard,  my body trembled. My lips quivered at the voice. Rottenness enters into my bones,  I tremble in my place, because I must wait quietly for the day of trouble, for the coming up of the people who invade us.
For though the fig tree shall not flourish, nor shall fruit be in the vines; the labor of the olive shall fail,  the fields shall yield no food; the flock shall be cut off from the fold,  there shall be no herd in the stalls;
yet I will rejoice in Jehovah. I will joy in the God of my salvation.
Jehovah, the Lord, is my strength. And he makes my feet like hinds' feet,  will make me to walk upon my high places.
Zephaniah
Zeph. The word of Jehovah which came to Zephaniah the son of Cushi, the son of Gedaliah, the son of Amariah, the son of Hezekiah, in the days of Josiah the son of Amon, king of Judah.
Zeph. I will utterly consume all things from off the face of the ground, says Jehovah.
Zeph. I will consume man and beast. I will consume the birds of the heavens,  the fishes of the sea,  the stumbling blocks with the wicked. And I will cut off man from off the face of the ground, says Jehovah.
Zeph. And I will stretch out my hand upon Judah,  upon all the inhabitants of Jerusalem. And I will cut off the remnant of Baal from this place,  the name of the Chemarim with the priests,
Zeph. and those who worship the host of heaven upon the housetops,  those who worship, who swear to Jehovah and swear by Malcam,
Zeph. and those who are turned back from following Jehovah,  those who have not sought Jehovah, nor inquired after him.
Zeph. Hold thy peace at the presence of the lord Jehovah, for the day of Jehovah is at hand. For Jehovah has prepared a sacrifice. He has consecrated his guests.
Zeph. And it shall come to pass in the day of Jehovah's sacrifice, that I will punish the rulers,  the king's sons,  all such as are clothed with foreign apparel.
Zeph. And in that day I will punish all those who leap over the threshold, who fill their master's house with violence and deceit.
Zeph. And in that day, says Jehovah, there shall be the noise of a cry from the fish gate,  a wailing from the second quarter,  a great crashing from the hills.
Zeph. Wail, ye inhabitants of Maktesh, for all the people of Canaan are undone. All those who were laden with silver are cut off.
Zeph. And it shall come to pass at that time, that I will search Jerusalem with lamps,  I will punish the men who are settled on their lees, who say in their heart, Jehovah will not do good, nor will he do evil.
Zeph. And their wealth shall become a spoil,  their houses a desolation. Yea, they shall build houses,  shall not inhabit them,  they shall plant vineyards,  shall not drink the wine of it.
Zeph. The great day of Jehovah is near. It is near and hastens greatly, the voice of the day of Jehovah. The mighty man cries there bitterly.
Zeph. That day is a day of wrath, a day of trouble and distress, a day of wasteness and desolation, a day of darkness and gloominess, a day of clouds and thick darkness,
Zeph. a day of the trumpet and alarm, against the fortified cities,  against the high battlements.
Zeph. And I will bring distress upon men, that they shall walk like blind men, because they have sinned against Jehovah,  their blood shall be poured out as dust,  their flesh as dung.
Zeph. Neither their silver nor their gold shall be able to deliver them in the day of Jehovah's wrath,  the whole land shall be devoured by the fire of his jealousy. For he will make an end, yea, a terrible end, of all those who dwell in the land.
Zeph. Gather yourselves together, yea, gather together, O nation that has no shame;
Zeph. before the decree bring forth, before the day passes as the chaff, before the fierce anger of Jehovah comes upon you, before the day of Jehovah's anger comes upon you.
Zeph. Seek ye Jehovah, all ye meek of the earth who have kept his ordinances. Seek righteousness, seek meekness. It may be ye will be hid in the day of Jehovah's anger.
Zeph. For Gaza shall be forsaken,  Ashkelon a desolation. They shall drive out Ashdod at noonday,  Ekron shall be rooted up.
Zeph. Woe to the inhabitants of the seacoast, the nation of the Cherethites! The word of Jehovah is against you, O Canaan, the land of the Philistines. I will destroy thee, that there shall be no inhabitant.
Zeph. And the seacoast shall be pastures, with cottages for shepherds and folds for flocks.
Zeph. And the coast shall be for the remnant of the house of Judah. They shall feed their flocks upon it. In the houses of Ashkelon they shall lie down in the evening. For Jehovah their God will visit them,  bring back their captivity.
Zeph. I have heard the reproach of Moab,  the revilings of the sons of Ammon, with which they have reproached my people,  magnified themselves against their border.
Zeph. Therefore as I live, says Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel, Surely Moab shall be as Sodom,  the sons of Ammon as Gomorrah, a possession of nettles,  salt pits,  a perpetual desolation. The residue of my people shall make a prey of them,  the remnant of my nation shall inherit them.
Zeph. They shall have this for their pride, because they have reproached and magnified themselves against the people of Jehovah of hosts.
Zeph. Jehovah will be terrible to them, for he will famish all the gods of the earth. And men shall worship him, everyone from his place, even all the isles of the nations.
Zeph. Ye Ethiopians also, ye shall be slain by my sword.
Zeph. And he will stretch out his hand against the north,  destroy Assyria,  will make Nineveh a desolation,  dry like the wilderness.
Zeph. And herds shall lie down in the midst of her. All the beasts of the nations, both the pelican and the porcupine shall lodge in the capitals of it. Their voice shall sing in the windows. Desolation shall be in the thresholds. For he has laid bare the cedar work.
Zeph. This is the joyous city that dwelt carelessly, that said in her heart, I am,  there is none besides me. How she has become a desolation, a place for beasts to lie down in! Everyone who passes by her shall hiss,  wag his hand.
Zeph. Woe to her who is rebellious and polluted, to the oppressing city!
Zeph. She obeyed not the voice. She received not correction. She trusted not in Jehovah. She did not draw near to her God.
Zeph. Her rulers in the midst of her are roaring lions. Her judges are evening wolves. They leave nothing till the morrow.
Zeph. Her prophets are airy and treacherous men. Her priests have profaned the sanctuary. They have done violence to the law.
Zeph. Jehovah in the midst of her is righteous. He will not do iniquity. Every morning he brings his justice to light. He does not fail,  the unjust man knows no shame.
Zeph. I have cut off nations. Their battlements are desolate. I have made their streets waste, so that none passes by. Their cities are destroyed, so that there is no man, so that there is no inhabitant.
Zeph. I said, Only fear thou me. Receive correction, so her dwelling shall not be cut off, according to all that I have appointed concerning her. But they rose early and corrupted all their doings.
Zeph. Therefore wait ye for me, says Jehovah, until the day that I rise up to the prey. For my determination is to gather the nations, that I may assemble the kingdoms, to pour upon them my indignation, even all my fierce anger. For all the earth shall be devoured with the fire of my jealousy.
Zeph. For then I will turn to the peoples of a pure language, that they may all call upon the name of Jehovah, to serve him with one consent.
Zeph. From beyond the rivers of Ethiopia, my suppliants, even the daughter of my dispersed, shall bring my offering.
Zeph. In that day thou shall not be put to shame for all thy doings, in which thou have transgressed against me. For then I will take away out of the midst of thee those who rejoice in thy pride,  thou shall no more be haughty in my holy mountain.
Zeph. But I will leave in the midst of thee an afflicted and poor people,  they shall take refuge in the name of Jehovah.
Zeph. The remnant of Israel shall not do iniquity, nor speak lies, nor shall a deceitful tongue be found in their mouth. For they shall feed and lie down,  none shall make them afraid.
Zeph. Sing, O daughter of Zion. Shout, O Israel. Be glad and rejoice with all the heart, O daughter of Jerusalem.
Zeph. Jehovah has taken away thy judgments. He has cast out thine enemy. The King of Israel, even Jehovah, is in the midst of thee. Thou shall not fear evil any more.
Zeph. In that day it shall be said to Jerusalem, Fear thou not, O Zion. Let not thy hands be slack.
Zeph. Jehovah thy God is in the midst of thee, a mighty one who will save. He will rejoice over thee with joy. He will rest in his love. He will joy over thee with singing.
Zeph. I will gather those who sorrow for the solemn assembly, who were of thee, to whom the burden upon her was a reproach.
Zeph. Behold, at that time I will deal with all those who afflict thee. And I will save that which is lame,  gather that which was driven away,  I will make them a praise and a name, whose shame has been in all the earth.
Zeph. At that time I will bring you in,  at that time I will gather you. For I will make you a name and a praise among all the peoples of the earth when I bring back your captivity before your eyes, says Jehovah.
Haggai
In the second year of Darius the king, in the sixth month, in the first day of the month, the word of Jehovah came by Haggai the prophet to Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah,  to Joshua the son of Jehozadak, the high priest, saying,
Thus speaks Jehovah of hosts, saying, This people say, It is not the time for us to come, the time for Jehovah's house to be built.
Then the word of Jehovah came by Haggai the prophet, saying,
Is it a time for you yourselves to dwell in your paneled houses while this house lies waste?
Now therefore thus says Jehovah of hosts: Consider your ways.
Ye have sown much,  bring in little. Ye eat,  ye have not enough. Ye drink,  ye are not filled with drink. Ye clothe yourselves,  there is none warm. And he who earns wages earns wages to put into a bag with holes.
Thus says Jehovah of hosts: Consider your ways.
Go up to the mountain,  bring wood,  build the house. And I will take pleasure in it,  I will be glorified, says Jehovah.
Ye looked for much, , lo, it came to little,  when ye brought it home, I blew upon it. Why? says Jehovah of hosts. Because of my house that lays waste while ye run each man to his own house.
Therefore for your sake the heavens withhold the dew,  the earth withholds its fruit.
I called for a drought upon the land,  upon the mountains,  upon the grain,  upon the new wine,  upon the oil,  upon that which the ground brings forth,  upon men,  upon cattle,  upon all the labor of the hands.
Then Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel,  Joshua the son of Jehozadak, the high priest, with all the remnant of the people, obeyed the voice of Jehovah their God,  the words of Haggai the prophet, as Jehovah their God had sent him. And the people feared before Jehovah.
Then Haggai, Jehovah's agent, spoke in Jehovah's message to the people, saying, I am with you, says Jehovah.
Jehovah stirred up the spirit of Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah,  the spirit of Joshua the son of Jehozadak, the high priest,  the spirit of all the remnant of the people. And they came and did work on the house of Jehovah of hosts, their God,
in the twenty-fourth day of the month, in the sixth month, in the second year of Darius the king.
In the seventh month, in the twenty-first day of the month, the word of Jehovah came by Haggai the prophet, saying,
Speak now to Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah,  to Joshua the son of Jehozadak, the high priest,  to the remnant of the people, saying,
Who is left among you that saw this house in its former glory? And how do ye see it now? Is it not in your eyes as nothing?
Yet now be strong, O Zerubbabel, says Jehovah,  be strong, O Joshua, son of Jehozadak, the high priest,  be strong, all ye people of the land, says Jehovah,  work. For I am with you, says Jehovah of hosts,
according to the word that I covenanted with you when ye came out of Egypt,  my Spirit abode among you. Fear ye not.
For thus says Jehovah of hosts: Yet once, it is a little while,  I will shake the heavens,  the earth,  the sea,  the dry land.
I will shake all nations,  the precious things of all nations shall come,  I will fill this house with glory, says Jehovah of hosts.
The silver is mine,  the gold is mine, says Jehovah of hosts.
The latter glory of this house shall be greater than the former, says Jehovah of hosts,  in this place I will give peace, says Jehovah of hosts.
In the twenty-fourth day of the ninth month, in the second year of Darius, the word of Jehovah came by Haggai the prophet, saying,
Thus says Jehovah of hosts: Ask now the priests concerning the law, saying,
If a man bears holy flesh in the skirt of his garment,  with his skirt touches bread, or pottage, or wine, or oil, or any food, shall it become holy? And the priests answered and said, No.
Then Haggai said, If a man who is unclean because of a dead body touches any of these, shall it be unclean? And the priests answered and said, It shall be unclean.
Then Haggai answered and said, So is this people,  so is this nation before me, says Jehovah,  so is every work of their hands. And that which they offer there is unclean.
now, I pray you, consider from this day and backward, before a stone was laid upon a stone in the temple of Jehovah.
Through all that time, when a man came to a heap of twenty measures, there were but ten. When he came to the wine vat to draw out fifty vessels, there were but twenty.
I smote you with blasting and with mildew and with hail in all the work of your hands, yet ye turned not to me, says Jehovah.
Consider, I pray you, from this day and backward, from the twenty-fourth day of the ninth month, since the day that the foundation of Jehovah's temple was laid, consider it.
Is the seed yet in the barn? Yea, the vine,  the fig tree,  the pomegranate,  the olive tree have not brought forth. From this day I will bless you.
the word of Jehovah came the second time to Haggai in the twenty-fourth day of the month, saying,
Speak to Zerubbabel, governor of Judah, saying, I will shake the heavens and the earth.
I will overthrow the throne of kingdoms,  I will destroy the strength of the kingdoms of the nations. And I will overthrow the chariots,  those who ride in them. And the horses and their riders shall come down, each one by the sword of his brother.
In that day, says Jehovah of hosts, I will take thee, O Zerubbabel, my servant, the son of Shealtiel, says Jehovah,  will make thee as a signet. For I have chosen thee, says Jehovah of hosts.
Zechariah
Zech. In the eighth month, in the second year of Darius, the word of Jehovah came to Zechariah the son of Berechiah, the son of Iddo, the prophet, saying,
Zech. Jehovah was greatly displeased with your fathers.
Zech. Therefore say thou to them, Thus says Jehovah of hosts: Return to me, says Jehovah of hosts,  I will return to you, says Jehovah of hosts.
Zech. Be ye not as your fathers, to whom the former prophets cried, saying, Thus says Jehovah of hosts: Return ye now from your evil ways,  from your evil doings,  they did not hear, nor hearken to me, says Jehovah.
Zech. Your fathers, where are they? And the prophets, do they live forever?
Zech. But my words and my statutes, which I commanded my servants the prophets, did they not overtake your fathers? And they turned and said, Like as Jehovah of hosts thought to do to us, according to our ways,  according to our doings, so he has dealt with us.
Zech. Upon the twenty-fourth day of the eleventh month, which is the month Shebat, in the second year of Darius, the word of Jehovah came to Zechariah the son of Berechiah, the son of Iddo, the prophet, saying,
Zech. I saw in the night, , behold, a man riding upon a red horse,  he stood among the myrtle trees that were in the bottom. And behind him there were horses, red, sorrel,  white.
Zech. Then I said, O my lord, what are these? And the agent who talked with me said to me, I will show thee what these are.
Zech. And the man who stood among the myrtle trees answered and said, These are they whom Jehovah has sent to walk to and fro through the earth.
Zech. And they answered the agent of Jehovah who stood among the myrtle trees,  said, We have walked to and fro through the earth, , behold, all the earth sits still,  is at rest.
Zech. Then the agent of Jehovah answered and said, O Jehovah of hosts, how long will thou not have mercy on Jerusalem and on the cities of Judah, against which thou have had indignation these seventy years?
Zech. And Jehovah answered the agent who talked with me with good words, comforting words.
Zech. So the agent who talked with me said to me, Cry thou, saying, Thus says Jehovah of hosts: I am jealous for Jerusalem and for Zion with a great jealousy.
Zech. And I am very greatly displeased with the nations that are at ease. For I was but a little displeased,  they helped forward the affliction.
Zech. Therefore thus says Jehovah: I have returned to Jerusalem with mercies. My house shall be built in it, says Jehovah of hosts,  a line shall be stretched forth over Jerusalem.
Zech. Cry yet again, saying, Thus says Jehovah of hosts: My cities shall yet overflow with prosperity,  Jehovah shall yet comfort Zion,  shall yet choose Jerusalem.
Zech. And I lifted up my eyes,  saw, , behold, four horns.
Zech. And I said to the agent who talked with me, What are these? And he answered me, These are the horns which have scattered Judah, Israel,  Jerusalem.
Zech. And Jehovah showed me four smiths.
Zech. Then I said, What are these coming to do? And he spoke, saying, These are the horns which scattered Judah, so that no man lifted up his head. But these have come to terrify them, to cast down the horns of the nations, which lifted up their horn against the land of Judah to scatter it.
Zech. And I lifted up my eyes,  looked. And, behold, a man with a measuring line in his hand.
Zech. Then I said, Where do thou go? And he said to me, To measure Jerusalem. To see what is the breadth of it,  what is the length of it.
Zech. And, behold, the agent who talked with me went forth. And another agent went out to meet him,
Zech. and said to him, Run, speak to this young man, saying, Jerusalem shall be inhabited as villages without walls, because of the multitude of men and cattle therein.
Zech. For I, says Jehovah, will be to her a wall of fire round about,  I will be the glory in the midst of her.
Zech. Ho, ho, flee from the land of the north, says Jehovah. For I have spread you abroad as the four winds of the heavens, says Jehovah.
Zech. Ho Zion, escape, thou who dwell with the daughter of Babylon.
Zech. For thus says Jehovah of hosts: After glory he has sent me to the nations which plundered you. For he who touches you touches the apple of his eye.
Zech. For, behold, I will shake my hand over them,  they shall be a spoil to those who served them. And ye shall know that Jehovah of hosts has sent me.
Zech. Sing and rejoice, O daughter of Zion, for, lo, I come,  I will dwell in the midst of thee, says Jehovah.
Zech. And many nations shall join themselves to Jehovah in that day,  shall be my people,  I will dwell in the midst of thee. And thou shall know that Jehovah of hosts has sent me to thee.
Zech. And Jehovah shall inherit Judah as his portion in the holy land,  shall yet choose Jerusalem.
Zech. Be silent, all flesh, before Jehovah, for he has arisen out of his holy habitation.
Zech. And he showed me Joshua the high priest standing before the agent of Jehovah,  Satan standing at his right hand to be his adversary.
Zech. And Jehovah said to Satan, Jehovah rebuke thee, O Satan. Yea, Jehovah who has chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee. Is this not a brand plucked out of the fire?
Zech. Now Joshua was clothed with filthy garments,  was standing before the agent.
Zech. And he answered and spoke to those who stood before him, saying, Take the filthy garments from off him. And to him he said, Behold, I have caused thine iniquity to pass from thee,  I will clothe thee with rich apparel.
Zech. And I said, Let them set a clean miter upon his head. So they set a clean miter upon his head,  clothed him with garments. And the agent of Jehovah was standing by.
Zech. And the agent of Jehovah testified to Joshua, saying,
Zech. Thus says Jehovah of hosts: If thou will walk in my ways,  if thou will keep my charge, then thou also shall judge my house,  shall also keep my courts,  I will give thee a place of access among these who stand by.
Zech. Hear now, O Joshua the high priest, thou and thy fellows who sit before thee, for they are men who are a sign. For, behold, I will bring forth my servant the Branch.
Zech. For, behold, the stone that I have set before Joshua. Upon one stone are seven eyes. Behold, I will engrave the graving of it, says Jehovah of hosts,  I will remove the iniquity of that land in one day.
Zech. In that day, says Jehovah of hosts, ye shall invite each man his neighbor under the vine and under the fig tree.
Zech. And the agent who talked with me came again,  awoke me, as a man who is awakened out of his sleep.
Zech. And he said to me, What do thou see? And I said, I have seen, , behold, a lampstand all of gold, with its bowl upon the top of it,  its seven lamps on it. There are seven pipes to each of the lamps, which are upon the top of it,
Zech. and two olive trees by it, one upon the right side of the bowl,  the other upon the left side of it.
Zech. And I answered and spoke to the agent who talked with me, saying, What are these, my lord?
Zech. Then the agent who talked with me answered and said to me, Do thou not know what these are? And I said, No, my lord.
Zech. Then he answered and spoke to me, saying, This is the word of Jehovah to Zerubbabel, saying, Not by might, nor by power,  by my Spirit, says Jehovah of hosts.
Zech. Who are thou, O great mountain? Before Zerubbabel thou shall become a plain,  he shall bring forth the top stone with shoutings of Grace, grace, to it.
Zech. Moreover the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Zech. The hands of Zerubbabel have laid the foundation of this house. His hands shall also finish it. And thou shall know that Jehovah of hosts has sent me to you.
Zech. For who has despised the day of small things? For these seven shall rejoice,  shall see the plummet in the hand of Zerubbabel, the eyes of Jehovah, which run to and fro through the whole earth.
Zech. Then I answered,  said to him, What are these two olive trees upon the right side of the lampstand and upon the left side of it?
Zech. And I answered the second time,  said to him, What are these two olive-branches, which are beside the two golden spouts that empty the golden oil out of themselves?
Zech. And he answered me and said, Do thou not know what these are? And I said, No, my lord.
Zech. Then he said, These are the two anointed ones, who stand by the Lord of the whole earth.
Zech. Then again I lifted up my eyes,  saw, , behold, a flying roll.
Zech. And he said to me, What do thou see? And I answered, I see a flying roll. The length of it is twenty cubits,  the breadth of it ten cubits.
Zech. Then he said to me, This is the curse that goes forth over the face of the whole land. For everyone who steals shall be cut off on the one side according to it,  everyone who swears shall be cut off on the other side according to it.
Zech. I will cause it to go forth, says Jehovah of hosts,  it shall enter into the house of the thief,  into the house of him who swears falsely by my name. And it shall abide in the midst of his house,  shall consume it, with the timber thereof and the stones thereof.
Zech. Then the agent who talked with me went forth,  said to me, Lift up now thine eyes,  see what this is that goes forth.
Zech. And I said, What is it? And he said, This is the ephah that goes forth. He said moreover, This is their appearance in all the land
Zech. (and, behold, a talent of lead was lifted up),  this is a woman sitting in the midst of the ephah.
Zech. And he said, This is Wickedness. And he cast her down into the midst of the ephah,  he cast the weight of lead upon the mouth of it.
Zech. Then I lifted up my eyes,  looked. And, behold, there came forth two women,  the wind was in their wings. Now they had wings like the wings of a stork,  they lifted up the ephah between earth and heaven.
Zech. Then I said to the agent who talked with me, Where do these carry the ephah?
Zech. And he said to me, To build her a house in the land of Shinar. And when it is prepared, she shall be set there in her own place.
Zech. And again I lifted up my eyes,  looked. And, behold, there came four chariots out from between two mountains,  the mountains were mountains of brass.
Zech. In the first chariot were red horses,  in the second chariot black horses,
Zech. and in the third chariot white horses,  in the fourth chariot strong grizzled horses.
Zech. Then I answered and said to the agent who talked with me, What are these, my lord?
Zech. And the agent answered and said to me, These are the four winds of heaven, which go forth from standing before the Lord of all the earth.
Zech. The chariot in which are the black horses goes forth toward the north country,  the white went forth after them,  the grizzled went forth toward the south country.
Zech. And the strong ones went forth,  sought to go that they might walk to and fro through the earth. And he said, Get you from here. Walk to and fro through the earth. So they walked to and fro through the earth.
Zech. Then he cried to me,  spoke to me, saying, Behold, those who go toward the north country have quieted my spirit in the north country.
Zech. And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Zech. Take from those of the captivity, even of Heldai, of Tobijah,  of Jedaiah,  come thou the same day,  go into the house of Josiah the son of Zephaniah, where they have come from Babylon.
Zech. Yea, take silver and gold,  make crowns,  set them upon the head of Joshua the son of Jehozadak, the high priest.
Zech. And speak to him, saying, Thus speaks Jehovah of hosts, saying, Behold, the man whose name is the Branch. And he shall grow up out of his place,  he shall build the temple of Jehovah,
Zech. even he shall build the temple of Jehovah. And he shall bear the glory,  shall sit and rule upon his throne. And he shall be a priest upon his throne,  the counsel of peace shall be between them both.
Zech. And the crowns shall be to Helem,  to Tobijah,  to Jedaiah,  to Hen the son of Zephaniah, for a memorial in the temple of Jehovah.
Zech. And those who are far off shall come and build in the temple of Jehovah. And ye shall know that Jehovah of hosts has sent me to you. And this shall come to pass, if ye will diligently obey the voice of Jehovah your God.
Zech. And it came to pass in the fourth year of king Darius, that the word of Jehovah came to Zechariah in the fourth day of the ninth month, even in Chislev.
Zech. Now those of Bethel had sent Sharezer and Regem-melech,  their men, to entreat the favor of Jehovah,
Zech. and to speak to the priests of the house of Jehovah of hosts,  to the prophets, saying, Should I weep in the fifth month, separating myself, as I have done these so many years?
Zech. Then the word of Jehovah of hosts came to me, saying,
Zech. Speak to all the people of the land,  to the priests, saying, When ye fasted and mourned in the fifth and in the seventh month, even these seventy years, did ye at all fast to me, even to me?
Zech. And when ye eat,  when ye drink, do ye not eat for yourselves,  drink for yourselves?
Zech. Should ye not hear the words which Jehovah cried by the former prophets, when Jerusalem was inhabited and in prosperity,  the cities thereof round about her,  the South and the lowland were inhabited?
Zech. And the word of Jehovah came to Zechariah, saying,
Zech. Thus Jehovah of hosts has spoken, saying, Execute true justice,  show kindness and compassion every man to his brother.
Zech. And do not oppress the widow, nor the fatherless, the sojourner, nor the poor man. And let none of you devise evil against his brother in your heart.
Zech. But they refused to hearken,  pulled away the shoulder,  stopped their ears, that they might not hear.
Zech. Yea, they made their hearts as an adamant stone, lest they should hear the law,  the words which Jehovah of hosts had sent by his Spirit by the former prophets. Therefore great wrath came from Jehovah of hosts.
Zech. And it has come to pass that, as he cried,  they would not hear, so they shall cry,  I will not hear, said Jehovah of hosts.
Zech. But I will scatter them with a whirlwind among all the nations which they have not known. Thus the land was desolate after them, so that no man passed through nor returned. For they laid the pleasant land desolate.
Zech. And the word of Jehovah of hosts came to me, saying,
Zech. Thus says Jehovah of hosts: I am jealous for Zion with great jealousy,  I am jealous for her with great wrath.
Zech. Thus says Jehovah: I am returned to Zion,  will dwell in the midst of Jerusalem. And Jerusalem shall be called The city of truth,  the mountain of Jehovah of hosts, The holy mountain.
Zech. Thus says Jehovah of hosts: There shall yet old men and old women dwell in the streets of Jerusalem, every man with his staff in his hand for very age.
Zech. And the streets of the city shall be full of boys and girls playing in the streets of it.
Zech. Thus says Jehovah of hosts: If it is marvelous in the eyes of the remnant of this people in those days, should it also be marvelous in my eyes? says Jehovah of hosts.
Zech. Thus says Jehovah of hosts: Behold, I will save my people from the east country,  from the west country.
Zech. And I will bring them,  they shall dwell in the midst of Jerusalem. And they shall be my people,  I will be their God, in truth and in righteousness.
Zech. Thus says Jehovah of hosts: Let your hands be strong, ye who hear in these days these words from the mouth of the prophets who were in the day that the foundation of the house of Jehovah of hosts was laid, even the temple, that it might be built.
Zech. For before those days there was no wage for man, nor any wage for beast, nor was there any peace to him who went out or came in, because of the adversary. For I set all men each one against his neighbor.
Zech. But now I will not be to the remnant of this people as in the former days, says Jehovah of hosts.
Zech. For there shall be the seed of peace. The vine shall give its fruit,  the ground shall give its increase,  the heavens shall give their dew. And I will cause the remnant of this people to inherit all these things.
Zech. And it shall come to pass that, as ye were a curse among the nations, O house of Judah and house of Israel, so I will save you,  ye shall be a blessing. Fear not. Let your hands be strong.
Zech. For thus says Jehovah of hosts: As I thought to do evil to you, when your fathers provoked me to wrath, says Jehovah of hosts,  I did not relent,
Zech. so again I have thought in these days to do good to Jerusalem and to the house of Judah. Fear ye not.
Zech. These are the things that ye shall do: Speak ye every man the truth with his neighbor. Execute the judgment of truth and peace in your gates.
Zech. And let none of you devise evil in your hearts against his neighbor,  love no false oath. For all these are things that I hate, says Jehovah.
Zech. And the word of Jehovah of hosts came to me, saying,
Zech. Thus says Jehovah of hosts: The fast of the fourth month,  the fast of the fifth,  the fast of the seventh,  the fast of the tenth, shall be to the house of Judah, joy and gladness,  cheerful feasts. Therefore love truth and peace.
Zech. Thus says Jehovah of hosts: Peoples shall yet come,  the inhabitants of many cities.
Zech. And the inhabitants of one city shall go to another, saying, Let us go speedily to entreat the favor of Jehovah,  to seek Jehovah of hosts. I will go also.
Zech. Yea, many peoples and strong nations shall come to seek Jehovah of hosts in Jerusalem,  to entreat the favor of Jehovah.
Zech. Thus says Jehovah of hosts: In those days, ten men shall take hold, out of all the languages of the nations, they shall take hold of the skirt of him who is a Jew, saying, We will go with you, for we have heard that God is with you.
Zech. The burden of the word of Jehovah upon the land of Hadrach,  Damascus its resting-place (for the eye of man and of all the tribes of Israel is toward Jehovah),
Zech. and also Hamath, which borders on it, Tyre and Sidon, because they are very wise.
Zech. And Tyre built herself a stronghold,  heaped up silver as the dust,  fine gold as the mire of the streets.
Zech. Behold, the Lord will dispossess her,  he will smite her power in the sea,  she shall be devoured with fire.
Zech. Ashkelon shall see it,  fear, Gaza also,  shall be greatly pained,  Ekron, for her expectation shall be put to shame. And the king shall perish from Gaza,  Ashkelon shall not be inhabited.
Zech. And a bastard shall dwell in Ashdod,  I will cut off the pride of the Philistines.
Zech. And I will take away his blood out of his mouth,  his abominations from between his teeth. And he also shall be a remnant for our God,  he shall be as a chieftain in Judah,  Ekron as a Jebusite.
Zech. And I will encamp the army around my house, that none pass through or return,  no oppressor shall pass through them any more. For now I have seen with my eyes.
Zech. Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion. Shout, O daughter of Jerusalem. Behold, thy king comes to thee. He is just,  having salvation, lowly,  riding upon a donkey, even upon a colt the foal of a donkey.
Zech. And I will cut off the chariot from Ephraim,  the horse from Jerusalem,  the battle bow shall be cut off. And he shall speak peace to the nations. And his dominion shall be from sea to sea,  from the River to the ends of the earth.
Zech. As for thee also, because of the blood of thy covenant I have set free thy prisoners from the pit in which is no water.
Zech. Turn you back to the stronghold, ye prisoners of hope. Even today I declare that I will render double to thee.
Zech. For I have bent Judah for me. I have filled the bow with Ephraim. And I will stir up thy sons, O Zion, against thy sons, O Greece,  will make thee as the sword of a mighty man.
Zech. And Jehovah shall be seen over them. And his arrow shall go forth as the lightning. And the lord Jehovah will blow the trumpet,  will go with whirlwinds of the south.
Zech. Jehovah of hosts will defend them. And they shall devour,  shall tread down the sling-stones. And they shall drink,  make a noise as through wine,  they shall be filled like bowls, like the corners of the altar.
Zech. And Jehovah their God will save them in that day as the flock of his people, as for the stones of a crown, lifted on high over his land.
Zech. For how great is his goodness,  how great is his beauty! Grain shall make the young men flourish,  new wine the virgins.
Zech. Ask ye of Jehovah rain in the time of the latter rain, even of Jehovah who makes lightnings,  he will give them showers of rain, to everyone grass in the field.
Zech. For the teraphim have spoken vanity,  the diviners have seen a lie,  they have told false dreams. They comfort in vain. Therefore they go their way like sheep. They are afflicted, because there is no shepherd.
Zech. My anger is kindled against the shepherds,  I will punish the he-goats. For Jehovah of hosts has visited his flock, the house of Judah,  will make them as his goodly horse in the battle.
Zech. From him shall come forth the cornerstone, from him the nail, from him the battle bow, from him every ruler together.
Zech. And they shall be as mighty men, treading down their enemies in the mire of the streets in the battle. And they shall fight, because Jehovah is with them,  the riders on horses shall be confounded.
Zech. And I will strengthen the house of Judah,  I will save the house of Joseph,  I will bring them back. For I have mercy upon them,  they shall be as though I had not cast them off. For I am Jehovah their God,  I will hear them.
Zech. And Ephraim shall be like a mighty man,  their heart shall rejoice as through wine. Yea, their sons shall see it,  rejoice. Their heart shall be glad in Jehovah.
Zech. I will whistle for them,  gather them. For I have redeemed them,  they shall increase as they have increased.
Zech. And I will sow them among the peoples,  they shall remember me in far countries. And they shall live with their sons,  shall return.
Zech. I will also bring them again out of the land of Egypt,  gather them out of Assyria. And I will bring them into the land of Gilead and Lebanon,  until space shall not be found for them.
Zech. And he will pass through the sea of affliction,  will smite the waves in the sea,  all the depths of the Nile shall dry up. And the pride of Assyria shall be brought down,  the scepter of Egypt shall depart.
Zech. And I will strengthen them in Jehovah,  they shall walk up and down in his name, says Jehovah.
Zech. Open thy doors, O Lebanon, that the fire may devour thy cedars.
Zech. Wail, O fir tree, for the cedar is fallen, because the fine ones are destroyed. Wail, O ye oaks of Bashan, for the strong forest has come down.
Zech. A voice of the wailing of the shepherds, for their glory is destroyed. A voice of the roaring of young lions, for the pride of the Jordan is laid waste.
Zech. Thus said Jehovah my God: Feed the flock of slaughter,
Zech. whose possessors kill them,  hold themselves not guilty. And those who sell them say, Blessed be Jehovah, for I am rich,  their own shepherds pity them not.
Zech. For I will no more pity the inhabitants of the land, says Jehovah. But, lo, I will deliver the men each one into his neighbor's hand,  into the hand of his king. And they shall smite the land,  I will not deliver them out of their hand.
Zech. So I fed the flock of slaughter, truly the poor of the flock. And I took to me two staves, the one I called Beauty,  the other I called Bands,  I fed the flock.
Zech. And I cut off the three shepherds in one month, for my soul was weary of them,  their soul also loathed me.
Zech. Then I said, I will not feed you. That which dies, let it die,  that which is to be cut off, let it be cut off,  let those who are left eat each one the flesh of another.
Zech. And I took my staff Beauty,  cut it apart, that I might break my covenant which I had made with all the peoples.
Zech. And it was broken in that day,  thus the poor of the flock who gave heed to me knew that it was the word of Jehovah.
Zech. And I said to them, If ye think good, give me my wage,  if not, forbear. So they weighed for my wage thirty pieces of silver.
Zech. And Jehovah said to me, Cast it to the potter, the good price that I was valued by them. And I took the thirty pieces of silver,  cast them to the potter in the house of Jehovah.
Zech. Then I cut apart my other staff, even Bands, that I might break the brotherhood between Judah and Israel.
Zech. And Jehovah said to me, Take to thee yet again the instruments of a foolish shepherd.
Zech. For, lo, I will raise up a shepherd in the land, who will not visit those who are cut off, nor will he seek those who are scattered, nor heal that which is broken, nor feed that which is sound,  he will eat the flesh of the fat,  will tear their hoofs in pieces.
Zech. Woe to the worthless shepherd who leaves the flock! The sword shall be upon his arm,  upon his right eye. His arm shall be entirely dried up,  his right eye shall be utterly darkened.
Zech. The burden of the word of Jehovah concerning Israel. Thus says Jehovah, who stretches forth the heavens,  lays the foundation of the earth,  forms the spirit of man within him:
Zech. Behold, I will make Jerusalem a cup of reeling to all the peoples round about,  upon Judah also it shall be in the siege against Jerusalem.
Zech. And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will make Jerusalem a burdensome stone for all the peoples. All who burden themselves with it shall be severely wounded. And all the nations of the earth shall be gathered together against it.
Zech. In that day, says Jehovah, I will smite every horse with terror,  his rider with madness. And I will open my eyes upon the house of Judah,  will smite every horse of the peoples with blindness.
Zech. And the chieftains of Judah shall say in their heart, The inhabitants of Jerusalem are my strength in Jehovah of hosts their God.
Zech. In that day I will make the chieftains of Judah like a pan of fire among wood,  like a flaming torch among sheaves. And they shall devour all the peoples round about, on the right hand and on the left,  Jerusalem shall yet again dwell in their own place, even in Jerusalem.
Zech. Jehovah also shall save the tents of Judah first, that the glory of the house of David and the glory of the inhabitants of Jerusalem not be magnified above Judah.
Zech. In that day Jehovah shall defend the inhabitants of Jerusalem. And he who is feeble among them at that day shall be as David,  the house of David shall be as God, as the agent of Jehovah before them.
Zech. And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will seek to destroy all the nations that come against Jerusalem.
Zech. And I will pour upon the house of David,  upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of supplication. And they shall look to me whom they have pierced. And they shall mourn for him, as a man mourns for his only son,  shall be in bitterness for him, as a man who is in bitterness for his firstborn.
Zech. In that day there shall be a great mourning in Jerusalem, as the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddon.
Zech. And the land shall mourn, every family apart, the family of the house of David apart,  their wives apart, the family of the house of Nathan apart,  their wives apart,
Zech. the family of the house of Levi apart,  their wives apart, the family of the Shimeites apart,  their wives apart,
Zech. all the families that remain, every family apart,  their wives apart.
Zech. In that day there shall be a fountain opened to the house of David and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin and for uncleanness.
Zech. And it shall come to pass in that day, says Jehovah of hosts, that I will cut off the names of the idols out of the land,  they shall no more be remembered. And I will also cause the prophets and the unclean spirit to pass out of the land.
Zech. And it shall come to pass that, when any shall yet prophesy, then his father and his mother who begot him shall say to him, Thou shall not live, for thou speak lies in the name of Jehovah. And his father and his mother who begot him shall thrust him through when he prophesies.
Zech. And it shall come to pass in that day, that the prophets shall be ashamed each one of his vision, when he prophesies, nor shall they wear a hairy mantle to deceive.
Zech. But he shall say, I am no prophet. I am a tiller of the ground, for I have been made a bondman from my youth.
Zech. And a man shall say to him, What are these wounds between thine arms? Then he shall answer, Those with which I was wounded in the house of my friends.
Zech. Awake, O sword, against my shepherd,  against the man who is my companion, says Jehovah of hosts. Smite the shepherd,  the sheep shall be scattered. And I will turn my hand upon the little ones.
Zech. And it shall come to pass, that in all the land, says Jehovah, two parts therein shall be cut off and die,  the third shall be left in it.
Zech. And I will bring the third part into the fire,  will refine them as silver is refined,  will try them as gold is tried. They shall call on my name,  I will hear them. I will say, It is my people,  they shall say, Jehovah is my God.
Zech. Behold, a day of Jehovah comes when thy spoil shall be divided in the midst of thee.
Zech. For I will gather all nations against Jerusalem to battle. And the city shall be taken,  the houses rifled,  the women ravished,  half of the city shall go forth into captivity. And the residue of the people shall not be cut off from the city.
Zech. Then Jehovah shall go forth,  fight against those nations, as when he fought in the day of battle.
Zech. And his feet shall stand in that day upon the mount of Olives, which is before Jerusalem on the east. And the mount of Olives shall be split in the midst of it toward the east and toward the west, a very great valley. And half of the mountain shall remove toward the north,  half of it toward the south.
Zech. And ye shall flee by the valley of my mountains, for the valley of the mountains shall reach to Azel. Yea, ye shall flee, just as ye fled from before the earthquake in the days of Uzziah king of Judah. And Jehovah my God shall come,  all the holy ones with thee.
Zech. And it shall come to pass in that day, that there shall not be light; the bright ones shall withdraw themselves.
Zech. But it shall be one day which is known to Jehovah, not day,  not night. But it shall come to pass, that at evening time there shall be light.
Zech. And it shall come to pass in that day, that living waters shall go out from Jerusalem, half of them toward the eastern sea,  half of them toward the western sea. In summer and in winter it shall be.
Zech. And Jehovah shall be King over all the earth. In that day Jehovah shall be one,  his name one.
Zech. All the land shall be made like the Arabah, from Geba to Rimmon south of Jerusalem. And she shall be lifted up,  shall dwell in her place, from Benjamin's gate to the place of the first gate, to the corner gate,  from the tower of Hananel to the king's wine-presses.
Zech. And men shall dwell therein,  there shall be no more curse,  Jerusalem shall dwell safely.
Zech. And this shall be the plague with which Jehovah will smite all the peoples who have warred against Jerusalem: their flesh shall consume away while they stand upon their feet,  their eyes shall consume away in their sockets,  their tongue shall consume away in their mouth.
Zech. And it shall come to pass in that day, that a great tumult from Jehovah shall be among them,  they shall lay hold each one on the hand of his neighbor,  his hand shall rise up against the hand of his neighbor.
Zech. And Judah also shall fight at Jerusalem. And the wealth of all the nations round about shall be gathered together, gold,  silver,  apparel, in great abundance.
Zech. And so shall be the plague of the horse, of the mule, of the camel,  of the donkey,  of all the beasts that shall be in those camps, as that plague.
Zech. And it shall come to pass, that everyone who is left of all the nations that came against Jerusalem shall go up from year to year to worship the King, Jehovah of hosts,  to keep the feast of tabernacles.
Zech. And it shall be, that of the families of the earth he who does not go up to Jerusalem to worship the King, Jehovah of hosts, upon them there shall be no rain.
Zech. And if the family of Egypt does not go up,  does not come, that there shall be the plague with which Jehovah will smite the nations that go not up to keep the feast of tabernacles.
Zech. This shall be the punishment of Egypt,  the punishment of all the nations that do not go up to keep the feast of tabernacles.
Zech. In that day there shall be upon the bells of the horses, HOLY TO JEHOVAH,  the pots in Jehovah's house shall be like the bowls before the altar.
Zech. Yea, every pot in Jerusalem and in Judah shall be holy to Jehovah of hosts. And all those who sacrifice shall come and take of them,  boil in it. And in that day there shall be no more a Canaanite in the house of Jehovah of hosts.
Malachi
The burden of the word of Jehovah to Israel by Malachi.
I have loved you, says Jehovah. Yet ye say, How have thou loved us? Was not Esau Jacob's brother, says Jehovah. Yet I loved Jacob,
but Esau I regarded inferior,  made his mountains a desolation,  gave his heritage to the jackals of the wilderness.
Whereas Edom says, We are beaten down,  we will return and build the waste places, thus says Jehovah of hosts: They shall build,  I will throw down,  men shall call them the border of wickedness,  the people against whom Jehovah has indignation forever.
your eyes shall see,  ye shall say, Jehovah be magnified beyond the border of Israel.
A son honors his father,  a servant his master. If then I am a father, where is my honor? And if I am a master, where is my fear? says Jehovah of hosts to you, O priests, who despise my name. And ye say, How have we despised thy name?
Ye offer polluted bread upon my altar. And ye say, How have we polluted thee? In that ye say, The table of Jehovah is contemptible.
when ye offer the blind for sacrifice, ye say, It is no evil! and when ye offer the lame and sick, It is no evil! Present it now to thy governor. Will he be pleased with thee, or will he accept thy person? says Jehovah of hosts.
Ye say, And now, I pray you, entreat the favor of God, that he may be gracious to us; this has been by your means. Will he accept any of your persons? says Jehovah of hosts.
Oh that there was among you who would shut the doors, that ye might not kindle my altar in vain! I have no pleasure in you, says Jehovah of hosts, nor will I accept an offering at your hand.
For from the rising of the sun even to the going down of the same, my name is great among the Gentiles. And in every place incense is offered to my name,  a pure offering. For my name is great among the Gentiles, says Jehovah of hosts.
But ye profane it, in that ye say, The table of Jehovah is polluted. And the fruit of it, even its food, is contemptible.
Ye also say, Behold, what a weariness it is! And ye have sniffed at it, says Jehovah of hosts. And ye have brought that which was taken by violence,  the lame,  the sick. Thus ye bring the offering. Should I accept this at your hand? says Jehovah.
But cursed be the deceiver, who has in his flock a male,  vows,  sacrifices to the Lord a blemished thing. For I am a great King, says Jehovah of hosts,  my name is feared among the Gentiles.
now, O ye priests, this commandment is for you.
If ye will not hear,  if ye will not lay it to heart, to give glory to my name, says Jehovah of hosts, then I will send the curse upon you,  I will curse your blessings. Yea, I have cursed them already, because ye do not lay it to heart.
Behold, I will rebuke your seed,  will spread dung upon your faces, even the dung of your feasts,  ye shall be taken away with it.
ye shall know that I have sent this commandment to you, that my covenant may be with Levi, says Jehovah of hosts.
My covenant of life and peace was with him. And I gave them to him that he might fear,  he feared me,  stood in awe of my name.
The law of truth was in his mouth,  unrighteousness was not found in his lips. He walked with me in peace and uprightness,  turned many away from iniquity.
For the priest's lips should keep knowledge,  they should seek the law at his mouth. For he is the messenger of Jehovah of hosts.
But ye are turned aside out of the way. Ye have caused many to stumble in the law. Ye have corrupted the covenant of Levi, says Jehovah of hosts.
Therefore I also have made you contemptible and base before all the people, according as ye have not kept my ways,  have had respect of persons in the law.
Have we not all one father? Has not one God created us? Why do we deal treacherously every man against his brother, profaning the covenant of our fathers?
Judah has dealt treacherously,  an abomination is committed in Israel and in Jerusalem. For Judah has profaned the holiness of Jehovah which he loves,  has married the daughter of a foreign god.
Jehovah will cut off out of the tents of Jacob, the man who does this: him who wakes,  him who answers,  him who offers an offering to Jehovah of hosts.
this again ye do: Ye cover the altar of Jehovah with tears, with weeping,  with sighing, insomuch that he does not regard the offering any more, nor receives it with good will at your hand.
Yet ye say, Why? Because Jehovah has been witness between thee and the wife of thy youth, against whom thou have dealt treacherously, though she is thy companion,  the wife of thy covenant.
did he not make one, although he had the residue of the Spirit? And why one? He sought a godly seed. Therefore take heed to your spirit,  let none deal treacherously against the wife of his youth.
For I hate putting away, says Jehovah, the God of Israel,  him who covers his garment with violence, says Jehovah of hosts. Therefore take heed to your spirit, that ye deal not treacherously.
Ye have wearied Jehovah with your words. Yet ye say, How have we wearied him? In that ye say, Everyone who does evil is good in the sight of Jehovah,  he delights in them, or Where is the God of justice?
Behold, I send my agent,  he shall prepare the way before me. And the Lord, whom ye seek, will suddenly come to his temple. And the messenger of the covenant, whom ye desire, behold, he comes, says Jehovah of hosts.
But who can abide the day of his coming? And who shall stand when he appears? For he is like a refiner's fire,  like fuller's soap.
he will sit as a refiner and purifier of silver. And he will purify the sons of Levi,  refine them as gold and silver. And they shall offer to Jehovah offerings in righteousness.
Then the offering of Judah and Jerusalem shall be pleasant to Jehovah, as in the days of old,  as in ancient years.
I will come near to you to judgment,  I will be a swift witness against the sorcerers,  against the adulterers,  against the false swearers,  against those who oppress the hireling in his wages, the widow,  the fatherless,  who turn aside the sojourner,  do not fear me, says Jehovah of hosts.
For I, Jehovah, do not change. Therefore ye, O sons of Jacob, are not consumed.
From the days of your fathers ye have turned aside from my ordinances,  have not kept them. Return to me,  I will return to you, says Jehovah of hosts. But ye say, How shall we return?
Will a man rob God? Yet ye rob me. But ye say, How have we robbed thee? In tithes and offerings.
Ye are cursed with the curse, for ye rob me, even this whole nation.
Bring ye the whole tithe into the storehouse, that there may be food in my house,  prove me now with this, says Jehovah of hosts, if I will not open to you the windows of heaven,  pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough for it.
I will rebuke the devourer for your sakes,  he shall not destroy the fruits of your ground, nor shall your vine cast its fruit before the time in the field, says Jehovah of hosts.
all nations shall call you blessed, for ye shall be a delightful land, says Jehovah of hosts.
Your words have been stout against me, says Jehovah. Yet ye say, What have we spoken against thee?
Ye have said, It is vain to serve God,  what profit is it that we have kept his charge,  that we have walked mournfully before Jehovah of hosts?
now we call the proud happy. Yea, those who work wickedness are built up. Yea, they challenge God,  escape.
Then those who feared Jehovah spoke one with another,  Jehovah hearkened,  heard,  a book of remembrance was written before him, for those who feared Jehovah,  who thought upon his name.
they shall be mine, says Jehovah of hosts, my own possession, in the day that I make. And I will spare them, as a man spares his own son who serves him.
Then ye shall return and discern between the righteous man and the wicked man, between him who serves God and him who does not serve him.
For, behold, the day comes, it burns as a furnace,  all the proud,  all who work wickedness, shall be stubble. And the day that comes shall burn them up, says Jehovah of hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch.
But to you who fear my name the sun of righteousness shall arise with healing in its wings,  ye shall go forth,  frolic as calves of the stall.
ye shall tread down the wicked, for they shall be ashes under the soles of your feet in the day that I make, says Jehovah of hosts.
Remember ye the law of Moses my servant, which I commanded to him in Horeb for all Israel, even statutes and ordinances.
Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the great and fearful day of Jehovah comes.
he shall turn the hearts of the fathers to the sons,  the heart of the sons to their fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with a curse.
Matthew
Matt. A book of a genealogy of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of Abraham.
Matt. Abraham begot Isaac,  Isaac begot Jacob,  Jacob begot Judah and his brothers,
Matt. and Judah begot Perez and Zerah from Tamar,  Perez begot Hezron,  Hezron begot Ram,
Matt. and Ram begot Amminadab,  Amminadab begot Nahshon,  Nahshon begot Salmon,
Matt. and Salmon begot Boaz from Rahab,  Boaz begot Obed from Ruth,  Obed begot Jesse,
Matt. and Jesse begot David the king. And David begot Solomon from the widow of Uriah,
Matt. and Solomon begot Rehoboam,  Rehoboam begot Abijah,  Abijah begot Asa,
Matt. and Asa begot Jehoshaphat,  Jehoshaphat begot Joram,  Joram begot Uzziah,
Matt. and Uzziah begot Jotham,  Jotham begot Ahaz,  Ahaz begot Hezekiah,
Matt. and Hezekiah begot Manasseh,  Manasseh begot Amon,  Amon begot Josiah,
Matt. and Josiah begot Jechoniah and his brothers during the Babylonian exile.
Matt. And after the Babylonian exile, Jechoniah begot Shealtiel,  Shealtiel begot Zerubbabel,
Matt. and Zerubbabel begot Abiud,  Abiud begot Eliakim,  Eliakim begot Azor,
Matt. and Azor begot Zadoc,  Zadoc begot Achim,  Achim begot Eliud,
Matt. and Eliud begot Eleazar,  Eleazar begot Matthan,  Matthan begot Jacob,
Matt. and Jacob begot Joseph the husband of Mary, of whom was born Jesus, who is called Christ.
Matt. So all the generations from Abraham to David are fourteen generations,  from David to the Babylonian exile fourteen generations,  from the Babylonian exile to the Christ fourteen generations.
Matt. Now the birth of Jesus Christ was this way. For his mother Mary, who was betrothed to Joseph, before they came together she was found having in her womb from the Holy Spirit.
Matt. But Joseph her husband, being a righteous man,  not wanting to expose her to public disgrace, intended to dismiss her privately.
Matt. But while he considered these things, behold, an agent of the Lord appeared to him in a dream, saying, Joseph, thou son of David, fear not to take Mary to be thy wife, for that which was begotten in her is from the Holy Spirit.
Matt. And she will bring forth a son,  thou shall call his name JESUS, for he will save his people from their sins.
Matt. Now all this has come to pass, so that what was spoken by the Lord through the prophet might be fulfilled, which says,
Matt. Behold, the virgin will have in her womb,  will bring forth a son. And they will call his name Immanuel, which is, being interpreted, God with us.
Matt. And Joseph, being roused from his sleep, did as the agent of the Lord ordered him. And he took his wife,
Matt. and knew her not until she brought forth her son, the firstborn. And he called his name JESUS.
Matt. Now Jesus having been born in Bethlehem of Judea in the days of Herod the king, behold, wise men from the east came to Jerusalem, saying,
Matt. Where is he who is born king of the Jews? For we saw his star in the east,  have come to worship him.
Matt. And Herod the king having heard it, he was troubled,  all Jerusalem with him.
Matt. And having gathered together all the chief priests and scholars of the people, he inquired of them where the Christ is born.
Matt. And they said to him, In Bethlehem of Judea. For thus it is written through the prophet,
Matt. And thou Bethlehem, land of Judah, are in no way least among the rulers of Judah, for out of thee will come forth a man who rules, who will tend my people Israel.
Matt. Then Herod having called the wise men privately, ascertained from them what time the star appeared.
Matt. And having sent them to Bethlehem, he said, After going, search diligently about the child. And when ye find him, report to me, so that I also having come, may worship him.
Matt. And when they heard the king, they departed. And lo, the star that they saw in the east went before them until, having come, it stood over where the child was.
Matt. And when they saw the star, they rejoiced with exceedingly great joy.
Matt. And having come into the house, they saw the child with Mary his mother,  having fallen down, they worshiped him. And having opened their treasures, they brought to him gifts, gold and frankincense and myrrh.
Matt. And divinely warned in a dream not to return to Herod, they departed into their own country by another way.
Matt. Now after they departed, behold, an agent of the Lord appears to Joseph in a dream, saying, After rising, take the child and his mother,  flee into Egypt,  thou be there until I tell thee, for Herod is going to seek the child to destroy it.
Matt. And having awakened, he took the child and his mother by night,  departed into Egypt.
Matt. And he was there until the end of Herod, so that what was spoken by the Lord through the prophet might be fulfilled, which says, Out of Egypt I called my Son.
Matt. Then Herod, when he saw that he was scorned by the wise men, was exceedingly angry,  having sent forth, he killed all the boys in Bethlehem,  in all the borders of it, from two years old and under, according to the time that he had ascertained from the wise men.
Matt. Then that which was spoken through Jeremiah the prophet was fulfilled, which says,
Matt. A voice was heard in Ramah, lamentation,  weeping,  great mourning, Rachel weeping for her children. And she did not want to be comforted, because they are not.
Matt. But when Herod perished, behold, an agent of the Lord appears in a dream to Joseph in Egypt, saying,
Matt. After rising, take the child and his mother,  go into the land of Israel, for those seeking the child's life have died.
Matt. And having awaken, he took the child and his mother,  came into the land of Israel.
Matt. But when he heard that Archelaus was reigning over Judea in place of his father Herod, he was afraid to go there. And divinely warned in a dream, he withdrew into the parts of Galilee.
Matt. And having come, he dwelt in a city called Nazareth, so that what was spoken through the prophets might be fulfilled, that he will be called a Nazarene.
Matt. And in those days John the immerser comes, preaching in the wilderness of Judea,  saying,
Matt. Repent ye, for the kingdom of the heavens has approached.
Matt. For this is he who was spoken of by Isaiah the prophet, saying, The voice of a man crying in the wilderness: Prepare ye the way of the Lord. Make his paths straight.
Matt. Now John himself had his raiment of camel's hair,  a leather belt about his waist. And his food was locusts and wild honey.
Matt. Then Jerusalem,  all Judea,  all the region of the Jordan went out to him,
Matt. and they were immersed by him in the Jordan, confessing their sins.
Matt. But when he saw many of the Pharisees and Sadducees coming to his immersion, he said to them, Ye offspring of vipers, who showed you to flee from the coming wrath?
Matt. Therefore produce fruit worthy of repentance.
Matt. And think not to say within yourselves, We have a father, Abraham. For I say to you, that God is able from these stones to raise up children to Abraham.
Matt. And even now the axe is laid at the root of the trees. Every tree therefore not producing good fruit is cut down,  cast into the fire.
Matt. I indeed immerse you in water for repentance,  he who comes after me is mightier than I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear. He will immerse you in the Holy Spirit.
Matt. Whose winnowing fork is in his hand,  he will thoroughly cleanse his threshing floor. And he will gather his wheat into the storehouse,  he will burn the chaff with unquenchable fire.
Matt. Then Jesus comes from Galilee to the Jordan to John to be immersed by him.
Matt. But John was preventing him, saying, I have need to be immersed by thee,  thou come to me?
Matt. But having answered, Jesus said to him, Allow it now, for thus it is fitting for us to fulfill all righteousness. Then he allows him.
Matt. And when Jesus was immersed, he went up straightaway out of the water. And lo, the heavens were opened to him,  he saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove,  coming upon him.
Matt. And lo, a voice out of the heavens, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.
Matt. Then Jesus was led by the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted by the devil.
Matt. And having fasted forty days and forty nights, afterward he was hungry.
Matt. And after he who tempts came, he said to him, If thou are the Son of God, speak so that these stones may become bread.
Matt. But having answered, he said, It is written, Man will not live on bread alone,  on every word coming out through the mouth of God.
Matt. Then the devil takes him into the holy city,  stands him on the pinnacle of the temple.
Matt. And he says to him, If thou are the Son of God, cast thyself down, for it is written, He will command his agents about thee, , They will take thee up in their hands, lest thou dash thy foot against a stone.
Matt. Jesus said to him, Again it is written, Thou shall not challenge the Lord thy God.
Matt. Again, the devil takes him onto an exceedingly high mountain,  shows him all the kingdoms of the world,  the glory of them.
Matt. And he says to him, All these things I give thee, if after falling down, thou will worship me.
Matt. Then Jesus says to him, Get thee behind me, Satan, for it is written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God,  him only thou shall serve.
Matt. Then the devil leaves him,  behold, agents came and served him.
Matt. Now when Jesus heard that John was delivered up, he departed into Galilee.
Matt. And having left Nazareth behind, after coming, he dwelt in Capernaum by the sea in the regions of Zebulun and Naphtali,
Matt. so that what was spoken through Isaiah the prophet might be fulfilled, which says,
Matt. The land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali, way of the sea, beyond the Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles,
Matt. the people who dwell in darkness saw a great light,  to those who dwell in the region and shadow of death, light sprang up to them.
Matt. From that time Jesus began to preach,  to say, Repent ye, for the kingdom of the heavens has approached.
Matt. And walking by the sea of Galilee, he saw two brothers, Simon who is called Peter,  Andrew his brother, casting a net into the sea, for they were fishermen.
Matt. And he says to them, Come behind me,  I will make you fishermen of men.
Matt. And straightaway having left the nets, they followed him.
Matt. And having gone on from there he saw two other brothers, James the son of Zebedee,  John his brother, in the boat with Zebedee their father, mending their nets. And he called them.
Matt. And straightaway having left the boat and their father, they followed him.
Matt. And Jesus went around all Galilee, teaching in their synagogues,  preaching the good news of the kingdom,  healing every sickness and every disease among the people.
Matt. And his fame went forth into all Syria. And they brought to him all those faring badly with various diseases,  gripped with pain,  being demon-possessed,  being lunatic,  paralyzed. And he healed them.
Matt. And many multitudes from Galilee and Decapolis and Jerusalem and Judea and beyond the Jordan followed him.
Matt. And having seen the multitudes, he went up onto the mountain. And when he sat down, his disciples came to him.
Matt. And having opened his mouth, he taught them, saying,
Matt. Blessed are the poor in spirit, because the kingdom of the heavens is theirs.
Matt. Blessed are those who mourn, because they will be comforted.
Matt. Blessed are the meek, because they will inherit the earth.
Matt. Blessed are those who hunger and thirst for righteousness, because they will be filled.
Matt. Blessed are the merciful, because they will obtain mercy.
Matt. Blessed are the pure in heart, because they will see God.
Matt. Blessed are the peacemakers, because they will be called sons of God.
Matt. Blessed are those who have been persecuted because of righteousness, because the kingdom of the heavens is theirs.
Matt. Blessed are ye when they revile you,  persecute you,  say every evil word, being deceitful against you because of me.
Matt. Rejoice,  be exceedingly glad, because your reward is great in the heavens, for so they persecuted the prophets before you.
Matt. Ye are the salt material of the earth. But if the salt material becomes ineffective, by what will it be salted? It is potent for nothing further, except to be cast outside and to be trodden down by men.
Matt. Ye are the light of the world. A city setting on a hill cannot be hid,
Matt. nor do they light a lamp,  put it under the bushel,  on the lampstand,  it shines to all in the house.
Matt. Thus your light should shine before men, so that they may see your good works,  glorify your Father in the heavens.
Matt. Think not that I came to abolish the law or the prophets. I came not to abolish,  to fulfill.
Matt. For truly I say to you, until the heaven and the earth pass away, one iota or one tittle will, no, not pass away from the law, until all things come to pass.
Matt. Whoever therefore may relax one of these least commandments,  may teach men so, he will be called least in the kingdom of the heavens. But whoever may do and may teach them, this man will be called great in the kingdom of the heavens.
Matt. For I say to you, that unless your righteousness abounds more than of the scholars and Pharisees, ye will, no, not enter into the kingdom of the heavens.
Matt. Ye have heard that it was said to them in old times, Thou shall not murder,  whoever murders will be liable to the judgment.
Matt. But I say to you, that every man who is angry at his brother without cause will be liable to the judgment,  whoever speaks an insult to his brother will be liable to the council,  whoever says, Foolish man, will be liable to the hell of fire.
Matt. If therefore thou should bring thy gift to the altar,  remember there that thy brother has anything against thee,
Matt. leave there thy gift before the altar,  go. First be reconciled to thy brother,  then, after coming, bring thy gift.
Matt. Be agreeing with thine opponent quickly, while thou are with him on the way, lest the opponent deliver thee to the judge,  the judge deliver thee to the subordinate,  thou will be cast into prison.
Matt. Truly I say to thee, thou will, no, not come out from there, until thou have paid the last quadran.
Matt. Ye have heard that it was said, Thou shall not commit adultery.
Matt. But I say to you, that every man who looks on a woman to crave her has already committed adultery with her in his heart.
Matt. And if thy right eye causes thee to stumble, remove it and cast it from thee, for it is advantageous for thee that one of thy body-parts should perish,  not thy whole body be cast into hell.
Matt. And if thy right hand causes thee to stumble, cut it off and cast it from thee, for it is advantageous for thee that one of thy body-parts should perish,  not thy whole body be cast into hell.
Matt. And it was said, Whoever may divorce his wife, let him give her a divorce certificate.
Matt. But I say to you, that whoever may divorce his wife apart from a matter of fornication, disposes her to commit adultery,  whoever may marry her who has been divorced commits adultery.
Matt. Again, ye have heard that it was said to them in old times, Thou shall not swear falsely,  shall render to the Lord thine oaths.
Matt. But I say to you, not to swear at all, neither by heaven, because it is the throne of God,
Matt. nor by the earth, because it is the footstool of his feet, nor by Jerusalem, because it is the city of the great King.
Matt. Neither shall thou swear by thy head, because thou cannot make one hair white or black.
Matt. But let your word be, Yes, yes, No, no. And anything beyond these is from evil.
Matt. Ye have heard that it was said, An eye for an eye,  a tooth for a tooth.
Matt. But I say to you, not to resist what is troublesome,  whoever will strike thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also.
Matt. And to the man who wants to sue thee,  take away thy coat, thou shall leave him thy cloak also.
Matt. And whoever will draft thee for one mile, go thou with him two.
Matt. Give to him who asks thee,  turn thou not away from him who wants to borrow from thee.
Matt. Ye have heard that it was said, Thou shall love thy neighbor,  hate thine enemy.
Matt. But I say to you, love your enemies, bless those who curse you, do good to those who hate you,  pray for those who mistreat you and persecute you,
Matt. so that ye may become sons of your Father in the heavens, because he makes his sun to rise on the evil and the good,  makes rain on the righteous and the unrighteous.
Matt. For if ye love those who love you, what reward have ye? Do not even the tax collectors the same?
Matt. And if ye only greet your friends, what do ye extra? Do not even the tax collectors this way?
Matt. Ye therefore shall be perfect, even as your Father in the heavens is perfect.
Matt. Be careful not to do your charity before men in order to be seen by them, otherwise ye have no reward from your Father in the heavens.
Matt. When therefore thou do charity, do not sound a trumpet before thee, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, so that they may have glory by men. Truly I say to you, they have their reward.
Matt. But when thou do charity, let not thy left hand know what thy right hand does,
Matt. so that thy charity may be in secret. And thy Father who sees in secret will himself reward thee in the open.
Matt. And when thou pray, thou shall not be as the hypocrites, because they love to pray having stood in the synagogues and in the corners of the thoroughfares, so that they may be seen by men. Truly I say to you, they have their reward.
Matt. But thou, when thou pray, enter into thy private room,  having shut thy door, pray to thy Father in secret,  thy Father who sees in secret will reward thee in the open.
Matt. And while praying do not use vain repetitions as the heathen do, for they think that they will be heard by their much speaking.
Matt. Be not therefore like them, for your Father knows what things ye have need of before ye ask him.
Matt. Pray ye therefore this way: Our Father in the heavens, hallowed be thy name.
Matt. May thy kingdom come. May thy will happen on the earth as also in heaven.
Matt. Give us this day the bread sufficient for us.
Matt. And forgive us our debts as we also forgive our debtors.
Matt. And bring us not into temptation,  deliver us from evil, because from thee is the kingdom and the power and the glory into the ages. Truly.
Matt. For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you.
Matt. But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses.
Matt. And when ye fast, become not like the gloomy looking hypocrites, for they make their faces unsightly, so that they may appear fasting to men. Truly I say to you, they have their reward.
Matt. But when thou fast, anoint thy head,  wash thy face,
Matt. so that thou may not appear fasting to men,  to thy Father in secret. And thy Father, who sees in secret, will reward thee.
Matt. Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon the earth, where moth and rust deteriorates,  where thieves break through and steal,
Matt. but lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust deteriorates,  where thieves do not break through nor steal.
Matt. For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.
Matt. The light of the body is the eye. If therefore thine eye is sound, thy whole body will be bright.
Matt. But if thine eye is bad, thy whole body will be dark. If therefore the light that is in thee is darkness, how great is the darkness!
Matt. No man can serve two masters, for either he will hate the one,  love the other, or he will hold to one,  disparage the other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon.
Matt. Because of this I say to you, be not anxious about your life, what ye may eat, or what ye may drink, nor yet for your body, what ye may wear. Is not the life more than the food,  the body than the clothing?
Matt. Look to the birds of the sky, because they sow not, nor do they reap, nor gather into barns,  your heavenly Father feeds them. Are ye not more valuable then they?
Matt. And which man of you by being anxious can add one cubit to his life span?
Matt. And why are ye anxious about clothing? Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow. They toil not, nor do they spin,
Matt. yet I say to you, that not even Solomon in all his glory was arrayed like one of these.
Matt. And if God so clothes the grass of the field, which today is,  tomorrow is cast into an oven, will he not much more you, O ye of little faith?
Matt. Be not therefore anxious, saying, What may we eat? or, What may we drink? or, What may we wear?
Matt. For the Gentiles seek after all these things, for your heavenly Father knows that ye need all these things.
Matt. But seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness,  all these things will be added to you.
Matt. Be not therefore anxious for the morrow, for the morrow will be anxious about things of itself. Sufficient for the day is the evil of it.
Matt. Do not criticize, that ye may not be criticized.
Matt. For by what criticism ye criticize, ye will be criticized,  by what measure ye measure, it will be measured to you.
Matt. And why do thou see the speck in thy brother's eye,  do not notice the beam in thine own eye?
Matt. Or how will thou say to thy brother, Let me take out the speck from thine eye,  behold, the beam in thine own eye?
Matt. Thou hypocrite, first take out the beam from thine own eye,  then thou will see clearly to take out the speck from thy brother's eye.
Matt. Do not give what is holy to the dogs, nor cast your pearls before the swine, lest they trample them by their feet,  having turn back may lacerate you.
Matt. Ask,  it will be given you. Seek,  ye will find. Knock,  it will be opened to you.
Matt. For every man who asks receives,  he who seeks finds,  to him who knocks it will be opened.
Matt. Or what man is there of you, who, if his son may ask for bread, will give him a stone,
Matt. and if he may ask for a fish, will give him a serpent?
Matt. If ye therefore, being evil, know to give good gifts to your children, how much more your Father in the heavens will give good things to those who ask him?
Matt. All things therefore, as many as ye may want that men should do to you, so also do ye to them, for this is the law and the prophets.
Matt. Enter ye in by the narrow gate, because wide is the gate,  broad is the way, that leads to destruction,  many are they who enter through it.
Matt. How narrow is the gate,  restricted the way, that leads to life,  few are those who find it.
Matt. But beware of false prophets, who come to you in sheep's clothing,  inwardly are predatory wolves.
Matt. From their fruits ye will know them. Do they gather grapes from thorns, or figs from thistles?
Matt. Likewise every good tree produces good fruits,  the corrupt tree produces bad fruits.
Matt. A good tree cannot produce bad fruits, nor a corrupt tree produce good fruits.
Matt. Every tree not producing good fruit is cut down,  thrown into the fire.
Matt. So then from their fruits ye will know them.
Matt. Not every man who says to me, Lord, Lord, will enter into the kingdom of the heavens,  he who does the will of my Father in the heavens.
Matt. Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, did we not prophesy by thy name,  by thy name cast out demons,  by thy name do many mighty works?
Matt. And then I will profess to them, I never acknowledged you. Depart from me, ye who work lawlessness.
Matt. Therefore every man, whoever hears these sayings of mine,  does them, I will compare him to a wise man who built his house upon the rock.
Matt. And the rain descended,  the torrents came,  the winds blew,  beat upon that house,  it fell not, for it had been founded upon the rock.
Matt. And every man who hears these sayings of mine,  does not do them, will be compared to a foolish man who built his house upon the sand.
Matt. And the rain descended,  the torrents came,  the winds blew,  beat upon that house,  it fell. And great was the fall of it.
Matt. And it came to pass, when Jesus finished these sayings, the multitudes were astonished at his teaching,
Matt. for he was teaching them as having authority,  not as their scholars.
Matt. And upon his coming down from the mountain, many multitudes followed him.
Matt. And behold, a leper who came, worshiped him, saying, Lord, if thou will, thou can cleanse me.
Matt. And having reached out his hand, Jesus touched him, saying, I will, be thou cleansed. And straightaway his leprosy was cleansed.
Matt. And Jesus says to him, See thou speak to no man,  go, show thyself to the priest,  bring the gift that Moses commanded for a testimony to them.
Matt. And upon his entering into Capernaum, a centurion came to him, beseeching him,
Matt. and saying, Lord, my boy has been laid down in the house, paralyzed, extremely tormented.
Matt. And Jesus says to him, after coming I will heal him.
Matt. And having answered, the centurion said, Lord, I am not worthy that thou should come under my roof,  only speak the word,  my boy will be healed.
Matt. For I also am a man under authority, having soldiers under myself. And I say to this man, Go,  he goes,  to another, Come,  he comes,  to my bondman, Do this,  he does it.
Matt. And when Jesus heard it, he marveled,  said to those who followed, Truly I say to you, not even in Israel have I found such great faith.
Matt. And I say to you, that many will come from east and west,  will sit down with Abraham,  Isaac,  Jacob, in the kingdom of the heavens,
Matt. but the sons of the kingdom will be cast out into the outer darkness. There will be the weeping and the gnashing of teeth.
Matt. And Jesus said to the centurion, Go thou. And as thou have believed, be it done to thee. And his boy was healed in that hour.
Matt. And when Jesus came into Peter's house, he saw his mother-in-law, having been laid down,  feverish.
Matt. And he touched her hand,  the fever left her. And she was raised up,  served him.
Matt. And having become evening, they brought to him many being demon possessed. And he cast out the spirits by word,  healed all those faring badly,
Matt. so that what was spoken through Isaiah the prophet might be fulfilled, which says, He himself took our infirmities,  bore our diseases.
Matt. Now when Jesus saw many multitudes around him, he commanded to depart to the other side.
Matt. And a certain scholar having come, he said to him, Teacher, I will follow thee wherever thou may go.
Matt. And Jesus says to him, The foxes have holes,  the birds of the sky, nests,  the Son of man has nowhere he may lay his head.
Matt. And another of his disciples said to him, Lord, allow me first to go and bury my father.
Matt. But Jesus said to him, Follow me,  leave the dead to bury their own dead.
Matt. And upon his entering into the boat, his disciples followed him.
Matt. And behold, a great tempest developed in the sea, so as for the boat to be covered by the waves,  he was sleeping.
Matt. And the disciples having approached, they awoke him, saying, Save us, Lord, we are perishing.
Matt. And he says to them, Why are ye cowardly, O ye of little faith? Then after rising, he rebuked the winds and the sea,  there became a great calm.
Matt. But the men marveled, saying, What kind of man is this, that even the winds and the sea obey him?
Matt. And upon his coming to the other side, into the country of the Gergesenes, two men being demon possessed met him, coming out of the sepulchers, exceedingly fierce, so that no man could pass by that way.
Matt. And behold, they cried out, saying, What is with us and thee, Jesus, Son of God? Did thou come here before the time to torment us?
Matt. Now there was afar off from them a herd of many swine feeding.
Matt. And the demons besought him, saying, If thou cast us out, allow us to go away into the herd of swine.
Matt. And he said to them, Go. And having come out, they went into the herd of swine. And behold, the whole herd of the swine stampeded down the slope into the sea,  perished in the waters.
Matt. And those who tended them fled,  having gone into the city, they told everything, also the things of the men being demon possessed.
Matt. And behold, the whole city came out to a meeting with Jesus. And having seen him, they besought him that he would depart from their regions.
Matt. And after entering into the boat, he passed over,  came into his own city.
Matt. And behold, they brought to him a paralyzed man who was placed on a bed. And having seen their faith Jesus said to the paralyzed man, Cheer up, child, thy sins have been forgiven thee.
Matt. And behold, some of the scholars said within themselves, This man blasphemes.
Matt. And having known their thoughts Jesus said, Why think ye evil in your hearts?
Matt. For which is easier, to say, Thy sins have been forgiven thee, or to say, Arise and walk?
Matt. But that ye may know that the Son of man has authority on earth to forgive sins (then he says to the paralyzed man), After rising, take up thy bed,  go to thy house.
Matt. And after rising, he departed to his house.
Matt. But when the multitudes saw it, they marveled,  glorified God, who gave such authority to men.
Matt. And passing forth from there, Jesus saw a man named Matthew sitting at the tax office. And he says to him, Follow me. And after rising, he followed him.
Matt. And it came to pass while he relaxed in the house,  behold, many tax collectors and sinners having come, they were sitting with Jesus and his disciples.
Matt. And when the Pharisees saw it, they said to his disciples, Why does your teacher eat with the tax collectors and sinners?
Matt. But Jesus having heard it, he said to them, Those who are strong have no need of a physician,  those who fare badly.
Matt. But after going, learn what this means, I desire mercy,  not sacrifice, for I came not to call the righteous,  sinners for repentance.
Matt. Then the disciples of John come to him, saying, Why do we and the Pharisees fast much,  thy disciples fast not?
Matt. And Jesus said to them, The sons of the wedding hall cannot mourn as long as the bridegroom is with them. But the days will come when the bridegroom will be taken away from them,  then they will fast.
Matt. And no man puts a patch of new cloth upon an old garment, for the patch of it pulls from the garment,  a tear becomes worse.
Matt. Neither do they put new wine into old wineskins. Otherwise the wineskins burst,  the wine is spilled,  the wineskins will perish. But they put new wine into fresh wineskins,  both are preserved.
Matt. While he spoke these things to them, behold, one ruler who came worshiped him, saying, My daughter has just now perished,  after coming, lay thy hand upon her,  she will live.
Matt. And having risen, Jesus followed him, also his disciples.
Matt. And behold, a woman having an issue of blood twelve years, after coming from behind, touched the edge of his garment.
Matt. For she said within herself, If only I may touch his garment, I will be healed.
Matt. But having turned around and seen her, Jesus said, Cheer up, daughter, thy faith has healed thee. And the woman was healed from that hour.
Matt. And Jesus having come into the ruler's house,  having seen the minstrels,  the crowd making a commotion,
Matt. he says to them, Depart, for the little girl did not die,  sleeps. And they ridiculed him.
Matt. But when the crowd was put out, having entered in, he took her hand,  the little girl arose.
Matt. And this report went forth into all that land.
Matt. And when Jesus departed from there, two blind men followed him, crying out,  saying, Be merciful to us, thou son of David.
Matt. And when he came into the house, the blind men came to him. And Jesus says to them, Believe ye that I am able to do this? They say to him, Yes, Lord.
Matt. Then he touched their eyes, saying, According to your faith may it happen to you.
Matt. And their eyes were opened. And Jesus strictly warned them, saying, See that no man knows it.
Matt. But having departed, they widely proclaimed him in all that land.
Matt. And after they departed, behold, they brought to him a mute man possessed with a demon.
Matt. And when the demon was cast out, the mute man spoke. And the multitudes marveled, saying, It was never so seen in Israel.
Matt. But the Pharisees said, By the ruler of the demons he casts out demons.
Matt. And Jesus went about all the cities and the villages, teaching in their synagogues,  preaching the good news of the kingdom,  healing every sickness and every disease among the people.
Matt. But when he saw the multitudes, he felt compassion for them, because they were troubled and dejected, as sheep having no shepherd.
Matt. Then he says to his disciples, The harvest truly is plentiful,  the workmen are few.
Matt. Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he will send forth workmen into his harvest.
Matt. And having called in his twelve disciples, he gave them authority over unclean spirits, so as to cast them out,  to heal every sickness and every disease.
Matt. Now the names of the twelve apostles are these: First, Simon, who is called Peter,  Andrew his brother, James the son of Zebedee,  John his brother,
Matt. Philip,  Bartholomew, Thomas,  Matthew the tax collector, James the son of Alphaeus,  Lebbaeus who was surnamed Thaddaeus,
Matt. Simon the Canaanite,  Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed him.
Matt. These twelve Jesus sent forth, having ordered them, saying, Go not into a way of the Gentiles,  enter not into a city of the Samaritans,
Matt. but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.
Matt. And while going, preach, saying, The kingdom of the heavens has come near.
Matt. Heal those who are feeble, cleanse the lepers, cast out demons. Freely ye received, freely give.
Matt. Acquire no gold, nor silver, nor copper in your belts,
Matt. no bag for the road, nor two coats, nor shoes, nor staffs, for the workman is worthy of his provision.
Matt. And into whatever city or village ye may enter, inquire who in it is worthy,  there abide until ye go forth.
Matt. And while entering into the house, salute it.
Matt. And if indeed the house is worthy, let your peace come upon it,  if it is not worthy, let your peace return to you.
Matt. And whoever will not receive you, nor hear your words, while departing that house or that city, shake off the dust of your feet.
Matt. Truly I say to you, it will be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment, than for that city.
Matt. Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves. Become ye therefore wise as serpents,  innocent as doves.
Matt. But beware of men, for they will deliver you up to councils,  they will scourge you in their synagogues,
Matt. and ye will be brought to governors and even kings because of me, for a witness to them and to the Gentiles.
Matt. But when they deliver you up, be not anxious how or what ye should speak, for it will be given you in that hour what ye will speak.
Matt. For ye are not who speak,  the Spirit of your Father speaking in you.
Matt. And a brother will deliver up a brother to death,  a father a child. And children will rise up against parents,  condemn them to death.
Matt. And ye will be hated by all men because of my name,  he who endures to the end, this man will be saved.
Matt. But when they persecute you in this city, flee into the other, for truly I say to you, ye will, no, not have completed the cities of Israel, until the Son of man comes.
Matt. A pupil is not above his teacher, nor a bondman above his lord.
Matt. It is enough for the pupil that he becomes like his teacher,  the bondman like his lord. If they have called the house-ruler Beelzebub, how much more those of his household.
Matt. Fear them not therefore, for there is nothing covered, that will not be revealed,  hid, that will not be known.
Matt. What I tell you in the darkness, speak ye in the light,  what ye hear in the ear, proclaim upon the housetops.
Matt. And be not afraid of those who kill the body,  are not able to kill the soul. But rather fear him who is able to destroy both soul and body in hell.
Matt. Are not two sparrows sold for a penny? And not one of them will fall on the ground independent of your Father.
Matt. But even the hairs of your head are all numbered.
Matt. Fear not therefore, ye are of worth more than many sparrows.
Matt. Therefore every man, whoever will profess in me before men, I also will profess in him before my Father in the heavens.
Matt. But whoever would deny me before men, I also will deny him before my Father in the heavens.
Matt. Think not that I came to spread peace on the earth. I came not to spread peace,  a sword.
Matt. For I came to divide a man against his father,  a daughter against her mother,  a daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law.
Matt. And a man's foes, are those of his own household.
Matt. He who loves father or mother above me is not worthy of me,  he who loves son or daughter above me is not worthy of me.
Matt. And he who does not take his cross and follow behind me, is not worthy of me.
Matt. He who finds his life will lose it,  he who loses his life because of me will find it.
Matt. He who receives you receives me,  he who receives me receives him who sent me.
Matt. He who receives a prophet in the name of a prophet will receive a prophet's reward,  he who receives a righteous man in the name of a righteous man will receive a righteous man's reward.
Matt. And whoever may give to drink one of these little ones merely a cold cup in the name of a disciple, truly I say to you he will, no, not lose his reward.
Matt. And it came to pass when Jesus finished directing his twelve disciples, he departed from there to teach and preach in their cities.
Matt. Now when John heard in the prison the works of the Christ, having sent two of his disciples,
Matt. he said to him, Are thou he who comes, or do we look for another man?
Matt. And having answered, Jesus said to them, After going, report to John the things that ye hear and see:
Matt. the blind receive their sight,  the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed,  the deaf hear,  the dead are raised up,  the poor are proclaimed good news.
Matt. And blessed is he, whoever will not be caused to stumble by me.
Matt. And while those men departed, Jesus began to say to the multitudes about John, What did ye go out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken with the wind?
Matt. But what did ye go out to see? A man clothed in delicate clothes? Behold, those wearing delicate things are in king's houses.
Matt. But what did ye go out to see? A prophet? Yea, I say to you,  more than a prophet.
Matt. For this is he about whom it is written, Behold, I send my agent before thy face who will prepare thy way before thee.
Matt. Truly I say to you, among men born of women there has not been raised a greater than John the immerser. Yet the smaller in the kingdom of the heavens is greater than he.
Matt. And from the days of John the immerser until now the kingdom of the heavens is treated aggressively,  aggressors seize it.
Matt. For all the prophets and the law prophesied until John.
Matt. And if ye are willing to receive it, he is Elijah who is going to come.
Matt. He who has ears to hear, let him hear.
Matt. But to what shall I compare this generation? It is like children sitting in the marketplaces, calling to their companions,
Matt. and saying, We piped to you,  ye did not dance, we mourned to you,  ye did not beat the breast.
Matt. For John came neither eating nor drinking,  they say, He has a demon.
Matt. The Son of man came eating and drinking,  they say, Behold the man, a glutton and a drunkard, a friend of tax collectors and sinners! And wisdom is justified from her children.
Matt. Then he began to upbraid the cities in which most of his mighty works occurred, because they did not repent.
Matt. Woe to thee, Chorazin! Woe to thee, Bethsaida! Because if the mighty works that occurred in you occurred in Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes.
Matt. Nevertheless I say to you, it will be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon in the day of judgment than for you.
Matt. And thou, Capernaum, which was exalted as far as the sky. Thou will be brought down as far as Hades, because if the mighty works had occurred in Sodom that occurred in thee, it would have remained until this day.
Matt. Nevertheless I say to you that it will be more tolerable for the land of Sodom in the day of judgment, than for thee.
Matt. Jesus having responded at that time, said, I extol thee, O Father, Lord of the heaven and the earth, because thou hid these things from the wise and intelligent,  revealed them to the childlike.
Matt. Yea, Father, because this way it was done pleasing in thy sight.
Matt. All things were delivered to me by my Father. And no man knows the Son, except the Father, nor does any man know the Father, except the Son,  he to whomever the Son wants to reveal him.
Matt. Come to me, all ye who labor and have been burdened,  I will give you rest.
Matt. Take my yoke upon you,  learn from me, because I am meek and lowly in heart,  ye will find rest for your souls.
Matt. For my yoke is befitting,  my burden is light.
Matt. At that time Jesus went through the grain fields on the sabbath,  his disciples were hungry and began to pluck ears,  to eat.
Matt. But the Pharisees, when they saw it, said to him, Behold, thy disciples do what is not permitted to do upon the sabbath.
Matt. But he said to them, Have ye not read what David did when he was hungry, he and those with him,
Matt. how he entered into the house of God,  ate the loaves of the presentation, which was not permitted for him to eat, nor for those with him, except only for the priests?
Matt. Or have ye not read in the law, that on the sabbath the priests in the temple profane the sabbath,  are guiltless?
Matt. But I say to you, that a greater than the temple is here.
Matt. But if ye had known what this means, I desire mercy,  not sacrifice, ye would not have condemned the innocent.
Matt. For the Son of man is Lord of the sabbath.
Matt. And having departed from there, he went into their synagogue.
Matt. And behold, there was a man having a withered hand. And they interrogated him, asking if it is permitted to heal on the sabbath, so that they might accuse him.
Matt. And he said to them, What man of you will there be, who will have one sheep,  if this falls into a pit on the sabbath, will he not grasp it,  lift it out?
Matt. How much therefore a man is superior to a sheep. So then it is permitted to do good on the sabbath.
Matt. Then he says to the man, Stretch forth thy hand. And he stretched it forth,  it was restored whole, as the other.
Matt. But when they went out, the Pharisees held a consultation against him, how they might destroy him.
Matt. And having known it Jesus withdrew from there,  many multitudes followed him,  he healed them all.
Matt. And he chided them so that they would not make him known,
Matt. so that what was spoken through Isaiah the prophet might be fulfilled, which says,
Matt. Behold, my Boy whom I chose, my beloved in whom my soul is well pleased. I will put my Spirit upon him,  he will declare justice to the Gentiles.
Matt. He will not quarrel, nor will he shout, nor will any man hear his voice in the thoroughfares.
Matt. A bruised reed he will not break,  smoldering flax he will not quench, until he sends forth justice for victory.
Matt. And in his name Gentiles will hope.
Matt. Then a blind and mute man being demon possessed, was brought to him. And he healed him, so as for the blind and mute man both to speak and to see.
Matt. And all the multitudes were amazed,  said, Is this not the son of David?
Matt. But when the Pharisees heard it, they said, This man does not cast out demons, except by Beelzebub the ruler of the demons.
Matt. And having known their thoughts Jesus said to them, Every kingdom divided against itself is brought to ruin,  every city or house divided against itself will not stand.
Matt. And if Satan casts out Satan, he is divided against himself. How then will his kingdom stand?
Matt. And if I cast out demons by Beelzebub, by whom do your sons cast them out? Because of this they will be your judges.
Matt. But if I cast out demons by the Spirit of God, then the kingdom of God has come near you.
Matt. Or how can any man enter into the house of the strong man,  plunder his goods, unless he first binds the strong man? And then he will plunder his house.
Matt. He who is not with me is against me,  he who does not gather with me scatters.
Matt. Because of this I say to you, every sin and blasphemy will be forgiven to men,  the blasphemy of the Spirit will not be forgiven men.
Matt. And whoever speaks a word against the Son of man, it will be forgiven him,  whoever speaks against the Holy Spirit, it will not be forgiven him, neither in the present age, nor in the one that is coming.
Matt. Either make the tree good,  its fruit good, or make the tree corrupt,  its fruit corrupt, for the tree is known by its fruit.
Matt. Ye offspring of vipers, how can ye, being evil, speak good things? For out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks.
Matt. The good man out of his good treasure brings forth good things,  the evil man out of his evil treasure brings forth evil things.
Matt. But I say to you, that every idle word, whatever men may speak, they will render account about it in the day of judgment.
Matt. For from thy words thou will be justified,  from thy words thou will be condemned.
Matt. Then some of the scholars and Pharisees answered, saying, Teacher, we want to see a sign from thee.
Matt. But having answered, he said to them, An evil and adulterous generation seeks after a sign,  no sign will be given to it except the sign of Jonah the prophet.
Matt. For as Jonah was in the belly of the sea-creature three days and three nights, so the Son of man will be in the heart of the earth three days and three nights.
Matt. The men of Nineveh will rise up in the judgment with this generation,  will condemn it, because they repented at the preaching of Jonah,  behold, a greater than Jonah is here.
Matt. The queen of the south will rise up in the judgment with this generation,  will condemn it, because she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon,  behold, a greater than Solomon is here.
Matt. But when the unclean spirit goes forth out of the man, it passes through waterless places, seeking rest,  finds it not.
Matt. Then it says, I will return into my house from where I came out. And when it comes, it finds it empty, swept,  put in order.
Matt. Then it goes,  takes with itself seven other spirits more evil than itself,  having enter in, they dwell there. And the last state of that man becomes worse than the first. So it will also be to this evil generation.
Matt. While he was still speaking to the multitudes, behold, his mother and his brothers had stood outside, seeking to speak to him.
Matt. And some man said to him, Behold, thy mother and thy brothers stand outside, seeking to speak to thee.
Matt. But having answered, he said to the man who told him, Who is my mother,  who are my brothers?
Matt. And having stretched forth his hand towards his disciples, he said, Behold, my mother and my brothers.
Matt. For whoever does the will of my Father in the heavens, he is my brother,  sister,  mother.
Matt. And on that day, having departed from the house, Jesus was sitting beside the sea.
Matt. And many multitudes were gathered to him, so as for him (having entered in) to sit in the boat,  all the multitude had stood on the shore.
Matt. And he spoke many things to them in parables, saying, Behold, the man who sows went forth to sow.
Matt. And as he sowed, some fell by the wayside,  the birds came and devoured them.
Matt. But others fell upon the rocky places, where they had not much soil,  straightaway they sprang up because they had no depth of soil.
Matt. But when the sun was risen, they were scorched,  because they had no root they withered.
Matt. And others fell in the thorns,  the thorns grew up and choked them.
Matt. But others fell upon the good ground,  yielded fruit, some a hundredfold, some sixty, some thirty.
Matt. He who has ears, let him hear.
Matt. And the disciples having come, they said to him, Why do thou speak to them in parables?
Matt. And having answered, he said to them, Because it has been given to you to know the mysteries of the kingdom of the heavens,  to those men it has not been given.
Matt. For whoever has, to him will be given,  he will have abundance,  whoever has not, even what he has will be taken away from him.
Matt. Because of this I speak to them in parables, because seeing they see not,  hearing they hear not, nor do they understand.
Matt. And in them is fulfilled the prophecy of Isaiah, which says, By hearing ye will hear,  will, no, not understand,  seeing ye will see,  will, no, not perceive.
Matt. For this people's heart became fat,  their ears hear heavily,  their eyes are shut, lest they should see with their eyes,  hear with their ears,  understand with their heart,  should turn,  I will heal them.
Matt. But blessed are your eyes, because they see,  your ears, because they hear.
Matt. For truly I say to you, that many prophets and righteous men longed to see the things that ye see,  did not see them,  to hear the things that ye hear,  did not hear them.
Matt. Hear ye then the parable of the man who sows.
Matt. Of every man who hears the word of the kingdom,  does not understand it, evil comes,  snatches away what was sown in his heart. This is that which was sown by the wayside.
Matt. And that which was sown upon the rocky places, this is he who hears the word,  straightaway receiving it with joy,
Matt. yet he has no root in himself, instead it is temporary. And when tribulation or persecution develops because of the word, straightaway he is caused to stumble.
Matt. And that which was sown in the thorns, this is he who hears the word,  the care of this age,  the deceitfulness of wealth, choke the word,  he becomes unfruitful.
Matt. But that which was sown upon the good ground, this is he who hears the word,  understands it, who indeed bears fruit,  is productive, some a hundredfold, some sixty, some thirty.
Matt. He set forth another parable to them, saying, The kingdom of the heavens is compared to a man sowing good seed in his field.
Matt. But while the men slept, his enemy came and sowed tares in the midst of the wheat,  went away.
Matt. And when the blade sprouted and produced fruit, then the tares also appeared.
Matt. But the bondmen of the house-ruler having come, they said to him, Sir, did thou not sow good seed in thy field? From where then does it have tares?
Matt. And he said to them, A hostile man did this. And the bondmen said to him, Do thou desire therefore, after going, we would gather them up?
Matt. But he said, No, lest while gathering up the tares, ye uproot the wheat together with them.
Matt. Allow both to grow together until the harvest. And at the time of the harvest I will say to the reapers, Gather up first the tares,  bind them in bundles in order to burn them,  gather the wheat into my barn.
Matt. He set forth another parable to them, saying, The kingdom of the heavens is like a grain of mustard plant, which having taken, a man sowed in his field.
Matt. Which indeed is smaller than all seeds,  when it is grown, it is greater than the plants,  becomes a tree, so as for the birds of the sky to come and lodge in the branches of it.
Matt. He spoke another parable to them. The kingdom of the heavens is like leaven, which having taken, a woman hid in three measures of meal until it was all leavened.
Matt. Jesus spoke all these things in parables to the multitudes,  he did not speak to them independent of a parable,
Matt. so that what was spoken through the prophet might be fulfilled, which says, I will open my mouth in parables. I will utter things concealed from the foundation of the world.
Matt. Then having sent the multitudes away, Jesus came into the house. And his disciples came to him, saying, Explain to us the parable of the tares of the field.
Matt. And having answered, he said to them, He who sows the good seed is the Son of man,
Matt. and the field is the world,  the good seed, these are the sons of the kingdom,  the tares are the sons of evil.
Matt. And the enemy who sowed them is the devil,  the harvest is the end of the age,  the reapers are agents.
Matt. As therefore the tares are gathered up and burned in fire, so it will be at the end of this age.
Matt. The Son of man will send forth his agents,  they will gather out of his kingdom all the stumbling-blocks,  those doing lawlessness,
Matt. and will cast them into the furnace of fire. There will be the weeping and the gnashing of teeth.
Matt. Then the righteous will shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father. He who has ears to hear, let him hear.
Matt. Again the kingdom of the heavens is like a treasure hidden in the field, which a man having found, he hid. And from the joy of it, he goes and sells all, as many things as he has,  buys that field.
Matt. Again, the kingdom of the heavens is like a man, a merchant, seeking fine pearls.
Matt. Who, having found one very valuable pearl, after departing, sold all, as many things as he had,  bought it.
Matt. Again, the kingdom of the heavens is like a net that was cast into the sea,  gathered from every kind,
Matt. which, when it was full, after dragging to the shore, having sat down, they gathered the good into vessels,  they cast out the useless.
Matt. So it will be at the end of the age. The agents will come forth,  separate the bad from among the righteous,
Matt. and will cast them into the furnace of fire. There will be the weeping and the gnashing of teeth.
Matt. Jesus says to them, Have ye understood all these things? They say to him, Yes, Lord.
Matt. And he said to them, Because of this every scholar who has been instructed in the kingdom of the heavens is like a man, a house-ruler, who brings forth out of his treasure things new and old.
Matt. And it came to pass, when Jesus finished these parables, he departed from there.
Matt. And having come into his fatherland he taught them in their synagogue, so as for them to be astonished,  say, From where is this wisdom and powers in this man?
Matt. Is not this the carpenter's son? Is not his mother called Mary,  his brothers, James and Joses and Simon and Judas?
Matt. And his sisters, are they not all near us? From where then are all these things in this man?
Matt. And they were offended by him. But Jesus said to them, A prophet is not without honor, except in his fatherland,  in his house.
Matt. And he did not many mighty works there because of their unbelief.
Matt. At that time Herod the tetrarch heard the report of Jesus,
Matt. and he said to his boys, This is John the immerser. He has risen from the dead,  because of this the powers work in him.
Matt. For Herod having arrested John, bound him and put him in prison because of Herodias, his brother Philip's wife.
Matt. For John said to him, It is not permitted for thee to have her.
Matt. And though he wanted to kill him, he feared the multitude because they held him as a prophet.
Matt. But Herod's birthday being brought, the daughter of Herodias danced in the midst,  pleased Herod.
Matt. Whereupon he promised with an oath to give her whatever she would ask.
Matt. And she, having been put forward by her mother, says, Give me here on a platter the head of John the immerser.
Matt. And he became sad,  because of the oaths,  of those dining together, the king commanded it to be given.
Matt. And having sent, he beheaded John in the prison.
Matt. And his head was brought on a platter,  given to the maiden,  she brought it to her mother.
Matt. And after coming, his disciples took up the body and buried it,  having gone, they informed Jesus.
Matt. Now when Jesus heard it, he departed from there in a boat into a desolate place in private. And when the multitudes heard of it, they followed him on foot from the cities.
Matt. And having come forth, Jesus saw a great multitude,  he felt compassion toward them,  healed the feeble of them.
Matt. And having become evening, his disciples came to him, saying, The place is desolate,  the hour is now past. Send the multitudes away, so that having gone into the villages, they may buy food for themselves.
Matt. But Jesus said to them, They have no need to depart. Give ye them to eat.
Matt. And they say to him, We have not here, except five loaves and two fishes.
Matt. But he said, Bring them here to me.
Matt. And after commanding the multitudes to sit down on the grass, having taken the five loaves,  the two fishes, having looking up to heaven, he blessed. And having broken them in pieces, he gave the loaves to the disciples,  the disciples to the multitudes.
Matt. And they all ate,  were filled. And they took up that which remained of the fragments, twelve baskets full.
Matt. And those who ate were about five thousand men, besides women and children.
Matt. And straightaway Jesus compelled the disciples to enter into the boat,  to go ahead of him to the other side, until he would dismiss the multitudes.
Matt. And having dismissed the multitudes, he went up onto the mountain in private to pray. And having become evening, he was there alone.
Matt. But the boat was now in the midst of the sea, being buffeted by the waves, for the wind was contrary.
Matt. And in the fourth watch of the night Jesus went to them, walking upon the sea.
Matt. And when the disciples saw him walking on the sea, they were troubled, saying, It is a ghost,  they cried out from fear.
Matt. But straightaway Jesus spoke to them, saying, Cheer up. It is I, fear not.
Matt. And having answered him, Peter said, Lord, if it be thou, bid me come to thee on the waters.
Matt. And he said, Come. And having come down from the boat, Peter walked upon the water to go to Jesus.
Matt. But seeing the boisterous wind, he was afraid,  having begun to sink, he cried out, saying, Lord, save me.
Matt. And straightaway having stretched forth his hand, Jesus took hold of him,  says to him, O thou of little faith, why did thou doubt?
Matt. And when they entered into the boat, the wind ceased.
Matt. And those who came in the boat worshiped him, saying, Thou really are the Son of God.
Matt. And when they crossed over, they came to the land of Gennesaret.
Matt. And when they recognized him, the men of that place sent into that whole region round about,  brought to him all those faring badly.
Matt. And they besought him that they might only touch the hem of his garment. And as many as touched were healed.
Matt. Then scholars and Pharisees from Jerusalem come to Jesus, saying,
Matt. Why do thy disciples transgress the tradition of the elders? For they do not wash their hands when they eat bread.
Matt. And having answered, he said to them, Why do ye also transgress the commandment of God, because of your tradition?
Matt. For God commanded, saying, Honor thy father and thy mother, , He who speaks evil of father or mother, let him perish in death.
Matt. But ye say, Whoever may say to the father or the mother, Whatever thou might have benefited from me is an offering.
Matt. And he will, no, not honor his father or mother. And ye have annulled the command of God because of your tradition.
Matt. Ye hypocrites, well did Isaiah prophesy about you, saying,
Matt. This people comes near me with their mouth,  honors me with their lips,  their heart is far distant from me.
Matt. And in vain they worship me, teaching as doctrines the commandments of men.
Matt. And having called in the multitude, he said to them, Hear and understand.
Matt. Not that which enters into the mouth defiles the man,  that which comes out of the mouth, this defiles the man.
Matt. Then having come near, his disciples said to him, Know thou that the Pharisees were offended when they heard the saying?
Matt. But having answered, he said, Every plant that my heavenly Father did not plant, will be uprooted.
Matt. Leave them. They are blind leaders of blind men,  if a blind man leads a blind man, both will fall into a ditch.
Matt. And having answered, Peter said to him, Explain this parable to us.
Matt. And Jesus said, Are ye also still without understanding?
Matt. Do ye not yet understand, that everything entering into the mouth goes into the belly,  is cast out into a toilet?
Matt. But the things coming out of the mouth come forth from the heart,  those things defile the man.
Matt. For from the heart comes forth evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false witnessings, revilings.
Matt. These are things defiling the man. But to eat with unwashed hands does not defile the man.
Matt. And having gone out from there, Jesus departed into the regions of Tyre and Sidon.
Matt. And behold, a Canaanite woman having come out from those regions, cried out to him, saying, Be merciful to me, O Lord, thou son of David, my daughter is grievously demon-possessed.
Matt. But he answered her not a word. And his disciples having approached, they besought him, saying, Send her away, because she cries out behind us.
Matt. But having answered, he said, I was not sent except to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.
Matt. But having come, she worshiped him, saying, Lord, help me.
Matt. And having answered, he said, It is not right to take the children's bread and cast it to the house dogs.
Matt. But she said, Yes, Lord, for even the house dogs eat of the crumbs that fall from the table of their masters.
Matt. Then Jesus having answered, said to her, O woman, great is thy faith. Be it done for thee as thou desire. And her daughter was healed from that hour.
Matt. And having departed from there, Jesus came near the sea of Galilee. And having gone up onto the mountain, he sat there.
Matt. And many multitudes came to him, having with them the lame, blind, mute, crippled,  many others. And they placed them beside Jesus' feet,  he healed them,
Matt. so as for the multitudes to marvel seeing the mute speaking, the maimed healthy,  the lame walking,  the blind seeing. And they glorified the God of Israel.
Matt. And Jesus having summoned his disciples, he said, I feel compassion toward the multitude because they continue with me now three days and do not have what they might eat. And I do not want to dismiss them without food, lest they might faint on the way.
Matt. And his disciples say to him, From where are so many loaves for us in a wilderness so as to feed so great a multitude?
Matt. And Jesus says to them, How many loaves have ye? And they said, Seven,  a few small fishes.
Matt. And he commanded the multitudes to sit down on the ground.
Matt. And after taking the seven loaves and the fishes, having expressed thanks, he broke in pieces,  gave to the disciples,  the disciples to the multitudes.
Matt. And they all ate and were filled. And they took up seven hampers full of the fragments that remained.
Matt. And those who ate were four thousand men, besides women and children.
Matt. And having dismissed the multitudes, he entered into the boat,  came into the regions of Magdala.
Matt. And the Pharisees and Sadducees who came, testing, demanded him to exhibit to them a sign from the sky.
Matt. But having answered, he said to them, When it becomes evening, ye say, Fair weather, for the sky is red.
Matt. And at morning, Bad weather today, for the sky is red, being gloomy. Hypocrites! Ye indeed know how to discern the face of the sky,  the signs of the times ye are not able.
Matt. An evil and adulterous generation seeks after a sign,  no sign will be given to it, except the sign of Jonah the prophet. And having left them behind, he departed.
Matt. And his disciples having come to the other side, they forgot to take loaves.
Matt. And Jesus said to them, Watch and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees.
Matt. And they deliberated among themselves, saying, We took no loaves.
Matt. And having known it, Jesus said to them, O ye of little faith, why do ye deliberate among yourselves because ye brought no loaves?
Matt. Do ye not yet understand, nor remember the five loaves of the five thousand,  how many baskets ye took up,
Matt. nor the seven loaves of the four thousand,  how many hampers ye took up?
Matt. How do ye not understand that I spoke to you not about bread, to beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees?
Matt. Then they understood that he said not to beware of the leaven of bread,  of the teaching of the Pharisees and Sadducees.
Matt. Now when Jesus came into the regions of Caesarea Philippi, he asked his disciples, saying, Who do men say I, the Son of man, am?
Matt. And they said, Some, John the immerser, others, Elijah,  others, Jeremiah, or one of the prophets.
Matt. He says to them, But who say ye, I am?
Matt. And Simon Peter having answered, said, Thou are the Christ, the Son of the living God.
Matt. And having answered, Jesus said to him, Blessed are thou, Simon Bar-jonah, because flesh and blood has not revealed it to thee,  my Father in the heavens.
Matt. And I also say to thee, that thou are Peter,  upon this rock I will build my church,  the gates of Hades will not prevail against it.
Matt. And I will give to thee the keys of the kingdom of the heavens,  whatever thou may bind on earth will be what is bound in the heavens,  whatever thou may loose on the earth will be what is loosed in the heavens.
Matt. Then he commanded his disciples that they should tell no man that he is Jesus, the Christ.
Matt. From that time Jesus began to show his disciples that he must go to Jerusalem,  suffer many things from the elders,  chief priests,  scholars,  be killed,  the third day be raised up.
Matt. And having taken him aside, Peter began to rebuke him, saying, Be merciful to thee, Lord. This will, no, not be to thee.
Matt. But having turned around, he said to Peter, Go thee behind me, Satan. Thou are my stumbling-block, because thou regard not the things of God,  the things of men.
Matt. Then Jesus said to his disciples, If any man wants to come behind me, let him deny himself,  take up his cross,  follow me.
Matt. For whoever wants save his life will lose it,  whoever will lose his life for my sake will find it.
Matt. For what does it profit a man, if he should gain the whole world,  lose his soul? Or what will a man give in exchange for his soul?
Matt. For the Son of man is going to come in the glory of his Father with his agents,  then he will reward each man according to his actions.
Matt. Truly I say to you, there are some of those who stand here, who will, no, not taste of death, until they see the Son of man coming in his kingdom.
Matt. And after six days Jesus takes Peter,  James,  John his brother,  brings them up onto a high mountain in private.
Matt. And he was transfigured before them,  his face shone as the sun,  his garments became white as the light.
Matt. And behold, Moses and Elijah appeared to them, talking with him.
Matt. And having responded, Peter said to Jesus, Lord, it is good for us to be here. If thou desire, we could make here three tabernacles, one for thee,  one for Moses,  one for Elijah.
Matt. While he was still speaking, behold, a bright cloud overshadowed them. And lo, a voice out of the cloud, saying, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. Hear ye him.
Matt. And when the disciples heard it, they fell on their face,  were exceedingly afraid.
Matt. And having come, Jesus touched them and said, Arise,  fear not.
Matt. And having lifted up their eyes, they saw no man, except Jesus only.
Matt. And while they were coming down from the mountain, Jesus commanded them, saying, Tell the vision to no man, until the Son of man will rise from the dead.
Matt. And his disciples questioned him, saying, Why then do the scholars say that Elijah must first come?
Matt. And having answered, Jesus said to them, Elijah indeed comes first,  will restore all.
Matt. But I say to you, that Elijah already came,  they knew him not,  did to him how many things they wanted. Likewise also the Son of man is going to suffer by them.
Matt. Then the disciples understood that he spoke to them about John the immerser.
Matt. And when they came to the multitude, a man came to him, kneeling to him,  saying,
Matt. Lord, be merciful to my son, because he is lunatic,  suffers badly. For he often falls into the fire,  often into the water.
Matt. And I brought him to thy disciples,  they could not heal him.
Matt. And having answered, Jesus said, O faithless and perverted generation, how long will I be with you? How long will I endure you? Bring him here to me.
Matt. And Jesus rebuked it,  the demon departed from him. And the boy was cured from that hour.
Matt. Then the disciples having come to Jesus in private, said, Why could we not cast it out?
Matt. And Jesus said to them, Because of your unbelief. For truly I say to you, if ye have faith as a grain of a mustard plant, ye will say to this mountain, Remove from here to there,  it will depart,  nothing will be impossible to you.
Matt. But this kind does not go out except by prayer and fasting.
Matt. And while they turned back in Galilee, Jesus said to them, The Son of man is going to be delivered into the hands of men,
Matt. and they will kill him,  the third day he will be raised up. And they were exceedingly sorry.
Matt. And when they came to Capernaum, those who receive the double-drachma came to Peter,  said, Does not your teacher pay the double-drachma?
Matt. He says, Yes. And when he entered into the house, Jesus anticipated him, saying, What think thou, Simon? The kings of the earth, from whom do they take taxes or tribute, from their sons or from strangers?
Matt. And Peter says to him, From strangers. Jesus said to him, Therefore the sons are free.
Matt. But, so that we might not offend them, after going to the sea, cast a hook. And take up the first fish coming up,  having opened its mouth, thou will find a four-drachma coin. After taking that, give thou to them for me and thee.
Matt. In that hour the disciples came to Jesus, saying, Who then is greater in the kingdom of the heavens?
Matt. And having called in a child, Jesus set it in the midst of them.
Matt. And he said, Truly I say to you, if ye are not turned,  become as children, ye will, no, not enter into the kingdom of the heavens.
Matt. He therefore who will make himself lowly as this child, this man is the greater in the kingdom of the heavens.
Matt. And whoever will receive one such child in my name receives me.
Matt. But whoever may cause one of these little ones who believe in me to stumble, it is advantageous for him that a donkey-powered millstone were hanged on his neck,  he were drowned in the depth of the sea.
Matt. Woe to the world because of stumbling-blocks. For it is necessary that the stumbling-blocks come, yet woe to that man through whom the stumbling-block comes.
Matt. And if thy hand or thy foot causes thee to stumble, cut them off and cast from thee. It is good for thee to enter into life crippled or maimed, than having two hands or two feet to be cast into the eternal fire.
Matt. And if thine eye causes thee to stumble, remove it and cast it from thee. It is good for thee to enter into life one-eyed, than having two eyes to be cast into the hell of fire.
Matt. See that ye not disparage one of these little ones, for I say to you, that in the heavens their agents do always behold the face of my Father in the heavens.
Matt. For the Son of man came to save that which was lost.
Matt. What does it seem to you? If it happens a hundred sheep are with some man,  one of them went astray, after going (having left the ninety-nine on the mountains), does he not seek the one going astray?
Matt. And if he happens to find it, truly I say to you, that he rejoices over it more than over the ninety-nine that have not gone astray.
Matt. So, it is not a purpose before your Father in the heavens, that one of these little ones should perish.
Matt. But if thy brother should sin against thee, go and reprove him between thee and him alone. If he should hear thee, thou have gained thy brother.
Matt. But if he should not hear, take with thee one or two besides, so that at the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established.
Matt. And if he is heedless of them, speak to the church. But if he is also heedless of the church, let him be to thee as the heathen and the tax collector.
Matt. Truly I say to you, however many things ye may bind on the earth will be things that are bound in heaven,  however many things ye may loose on the earth will be things that that are loosed in heaven.
Matt. Again I say to you truly, that if two of you should agree on the earth concerning every matter, whatever they might ask, it will happen for them from my Father in the heavens.
Matt. For where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them.
Matt. Then Peter having come to him, he said, Lord, how often will my brother sin against me,  I forgive him? Until seven times?
Matt. Jesus says to him, I say to thee, not until seven times,  until seventy times seven.
Matt. Because of this the kingdom of the heavens is compared to a man, a king, who wanted to settle account with his bondmen.
Matt. And when he began to settle, one debtor of ten thousand talents was brought to him.
Matt. But of him not having to pay, his lord commanded him to be sold,  his wife and children,  all things, as many as he had,  payment to be made.
Matt. The bondman therefore having fallen down, worshiped him, saying, Lord, be patient toward me and I will pay thee all.
Matt. And having felt compassion, the lord of that bondman released him,  forgave him the debt.
Matt. But after going out, that bondman found one of his fellow bondmen who owed him a hundred denarii. And having grabbed him, he choked him, saying, Pay me if thou owe anything.
Matt. So his fellow bondman having fallen down at his feet, besought him, saying, Be patience toward me,  I will pay thee.
Matt. But he would not, instead, having left him, he cast him into prison until he would pay that which was owed.
Matt. And when his fellow bondmen saw the things that happened, they were extremely sorry. And after coming, they reported to their lord all the things that happened.
Matt. Then his lord having summoned him, he says to him, Thou evil bondman, I forgave thee all that debt because thou besought me.
Matt. Was it not necessary for thee also to be merciful to thy fellow bondman, as I also was merciful to thee?
Matt. And having become angry, his lord delivered him to the tormentors until he would pay all that was due to him.
Matt. So also my heavenly Father will do to you, if ye do not forgive each man his brother, from your hearts, their trespasses.
Matt. And it came to pass when Jesus had finished these sayings, he departed from Galilee and came into the regions of Judea beyond the Jordan.
Matt. And many multitudes followed him and he healed them there.
Matt. And Pharisees came to him, trying him,  saying to him, Is it permitted for a man to divorce his wife for every cause?
Matt. And having answered, he said to them, Have ye not read that he who made them from the beginning made them male and female,
Matt. and said, For this reason a man will leave his father and mother behind,  will be bonded with his wife,  the two will be in one flesh?
Matt. So that they are no longer two,  one flesh. What therefore God has joined together, no man shall separate.
Matt. They say to him, Why then did Moses command to give a writing of divorcement,  to divorce her?
Matt. He says to them, For your hard heart Moses allowed you to divorce your wives,  from the beginning it did not happen this way.
Matt. And I say to you, that whoever may divorce his wife, not for fornication,  will marry another, commits adultery. And he who married her who has been divorced commits adultery.
Matt. His disciples say to him, If the case of the man with his wife is this way, it is not advantageous to marry.
Matt. But he said to them, Not all men can accommodate this saying,  to whom it has been given.
Matt. For there are eunuchs who were born this way from their mother's belly,  there are eunuchs who were made eunuchs by men,  there are eunuchs who made themselves eunuchs because of the kingdom of the heavens. He who is able to receive it, let him receive it.
Matt. Then children were brought to him, so that he would lay his hands on them and pray,  the disciples rebuked them.
Matt. But Jesus said, Allow the children,  do not forbid them to come to me, for of such kind is the kingdom of the heavens.
Matt. And having laid his hands on them, he departed from there.
Matt. And behold one man having come to him, said, Good teacher, what good thing should I do so that I may have eternal life?
Matt. And he said to him, Why do thou call me good? There is none good except one, God. But if thou want to enter into life, keep the commandments.
Matt. He says to him, Which? And Jesus said, Thou shall not murder. Thou shall not commit adultery. Thou shall not steal. Thou shall not testify falsely.
Matt. Honor the father and mother, , Thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself.
Matt. The young man says to him, All these things I have kept from my youthfulness. What do I lack yet?
Matt. Jesus said to him, If thou want to be perfect, go, sell the things being possessed by thee,  give to the poor,  thou will have treasure in heaven. And come, follow me.
Matt. But when the young man heard the saying, he went away sorrowing, for he was having many possessions.
Matt. And Jesus said to his disciples, Truly I say to you, that a rich man will enter into the kingdom of the heavens difficultly.
Matt. And again I say to you, it is easier for a camel to pass through the hole of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.
Matt. And when his disciples heard it, they were exceedingly amazed, saying, Who then can be saved?
Matt. And having looked, Jesus said to them, With men this is impossible,  with God all things are possible.
Matt. Then having answered, Peter said to him, Lo, we have forsaken all,  followed thee. What then will be for us?
Matt. And Jesus said to them, Truly I say to you, that ye who have followed me, in the regeneration when the Son of man will sit on the throne of his glory, ye also will sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.
Matt. And every man who has forsaken houses, or brothers, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, because of my name, will receive a hundredfold,  will inherit eternal life.
Matt. But many first will be last,  last, first.
Matt. For the kingdom of the heavens is compared to a man, a house-ruler, who went out in the early morning at the same time to hire workmen for his vineyard.
Matt. And having agreed with the workmen for a denarius a day, he sent them into his vineyard.
Matt. And having gone out about the third hour, he saw others having stood idle in the marketplace.
Matt. And he said to those men, Go ye also into the vineyard,  whatever would be right I will give you,  they went.
Matt. Again having gone out about the sixth and the ninth hour, he did likewise.
Matt. And having gone out about the eleventh hour, he found others who have stood idle. And he says to them, Why have ye stood here idle the whole day?
Matt. They say to him, Because no man has hired us. He says to them, Go ye also into the vineyard,  whatever would be right ye will receive.
Matt. And having become evening, the lord of the vineyard says to his manager, Call the workmen,  render to them their wage, having begun from the last until the first.
Matt. And those who came about the eleventh hour, each received a denarius.
Matt. But when the first came, they supposed that they would receive more. And they also received a denarius each.
Matt. And when they received it, they murmured against the house-ruler,
Matt. saying, These last did one hour,  thou have made them equal to us, who have borne the burden of the day and the heat.
Matt. But having answered, he said to one of them, Friend, I do thee no wrong. Did thou not agree with me for a denarius?
Matt. Take thine and go. But I want to give to this last man, as to thee also.
Matt. Is it not permitted for me to do what I want with my own? Is thine eye evil, because I am good?
Matt. So the last will be first,  the first last, for many are called,  few chosen.
Matt. And while going up to Jerusalem, Jesus took the twelve disciples in private on the way,  he said to them,
Matt. Behold, we go up to Jerusalem,  the Son of man will be betrayed to the chief priests and scholars. And they will condemn him to death,
Matt. and will deliver him to the Gentiles to ridicule,  to scourge,  to crucify. And the third day he will rise.
Matt. Then the mother of the sons of Zebedee came to him with her sons, worshiping,  asking something from him.
Matt. And he said to her, What do thou want? She says to him, Speak that these my two sons may sit, one at thy right hand and one at thy left hand in thy kingdom.
Matt. But having answered, Jesus said, Ye know not what ye are asking. Are ye able to drink the cup that I am going to drink, or to be immersed the immersion that I am immersed? They say to him, We are able.
Matt. And he says to them, Ye will indeed drink my cup,  ye will be immersed the immersion that I am immersed. But to sit at my right hand and at my left hand is not mine to give,  to whom it has been prepared by my Father.
Matt. And when the ten heard it, they were indignant about the two brothers.
Matt. But having summoned them, Jesus said, Ye know that the rulers of the Gentiles lord over them,  their eminent men have power over them.
Matt. But it shall not be so among you. Rather whoever wants to become great among you, he shall be your helper,
Matt. and whoever wants be first among you shall be your bondman.
Matt. Just as the Son of man came not to be served,  to serve,  to give his life a ransom for many.
Matt. And when they went out from Jericho, a great multitude followed him.
Matt. And behold, two blind men sitting by the wayside, having heard that Jesus was passing by, cried out, saying, Be merciful to us, Lord, thou son of David.
Matt. And the multitude rebuked them, so that they would be quiet,  they cried out greater, saying, Be merciful to us, Lord, thou son of David.
Matt. And having stood still, Jesus called them and said, What do ye want that I would do to you?
Matt. They say to him, Lord, that our eyes may be opened.
Matt. And having felt compassion, Jesus touched their eyes,  straightaway they received their sight,  followed him.
Matt. And when they came near to Jerusalem,  came to Bethsphage, to the mount of Olives, then Jesus sent two disciples,
Matt. saying to them, Go into the village opposite you,  straightaway ye will find a donkey tied,  a colt with it. Having loosed them, bring to me.
Matt. And if any man says anything to you, ye will say, The Lord has need of them,  straightaway he will send them.
Matt. Now all this came to pass, so that what was spoken through the prophet might be fulfilled, which says,
Matt. Say ye to the daughter of Zion, Behold, thy King comes to thee, meek,  mounted upon a donkey,  a colt the foal of a pack animal.
Matt. And the disciples having gone,  having done as Jesus commanded them,
Matt. they brought the donkey and the colt,  put their garments over them. And he sat upon them.
Matt. And the great multitude spread their garments on the road,  others cut down branches from the trees,  spread them on the road.
Matt. And the multitudes who went ahead and those who followed, cried out, saying, Hosanna to the son of David! Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord. Hosanna in the highest!
Matt. And when he entered into Jerusalem, all the city was shaken, saying, Who is this?
Matt. And the multitudes said, This is Jesus, the prophet from Nazareth of Galilee.
Matt. And Jesus entered into the temple of God,  cast out all those who sold and bought in the temple. And he overturned the tables of the moneychangers,  the seats of those who sold the doves.
Matt. And he says to them, It is written, My house will be called a house of prayer,  ye made it a den of robbers.
Matt. And the lame and the blind came to him in the temple,  he healed them.
Matt. But when the chief priests and the scholars saw the wonderful things that he did,  the boys crying out in the temple and saying, Hosanna to the son of David, they were indignant,
Matt. and said to him, Do thou hear what these are saying? And Jesus says to them, Yes! Did ye never read, Out of the mouth of children and those who suckle thou have perfected praise?
Matt. And having left them behind, he went out of the city to Bethany,  lodged there.
Matt. Now early while returning to the city, he was hungry.
Matt. And having seen a fig tree, one on the way, he came to it,  found nothing on it, except leaves only. And he says to it, Let fruit no longer be produced from thee into the age. And immediately the fig tree dried out.
Matt. And when the disciples saw it, they marveled, saying, How did the fig tree dry out immediately?
Matt. And having answered, Jesus said to them, Truly I say to you, if ye have faith,  doubt not, ye will not only do that of the fig tree,  even if ye may say to this mountain, Be thou taken up and cast into the sea, it will happen.
Matt. And all things, as many as ye may ask in prayer, believing, ye will receive.
Matt. And when he came into the temple, the chief priests and the elders of the people came to him while he taught, saying, By what authority do thou these things? And who gave thee this authority?
Matt. And having answered, Jesus said to them, I also will ask you one word, which if ye tell me, I also will tell you by what authority I do these things.
Matt. The immersion of John, from where was it, from heaven or from men? And they deliberated with themselves, saying, If we should say, From heaven, he will say to us, Why then did ye not believe him?
Matt. But if we should say, From men, we fear the multitude, for all hold John as a prophet.
Matt. And having answered Jesus, they said, We know not. He said to them, And neither do I tell you by what authority I do these things.
Matt. But what does it seem to you? A man had two children. And having come to the first, he said, Child, go work today in my vineyard.
Matt. And having answered, he said, I do not want to,  having repented later, he went.
Matt. And having come to the second, he said likewise. And having answered, he said, I, sir,  did not go.
Matt. Which of the two did the will of the father? They say to him, The first. Jesus says to them, Truly I say to you, that the tax collectors and the harlots go into the kingdom of God before you.
Matt. For John came to you in a way of righteousness,  ye did not believe him,  the tax collectors and the harlots believed him. And having seen it, ye did not repent afterward to believe him.
Matt. Hear ye another parable. There was a certain man who was a house-ruler, who planted a vineyard,  placed a hedge around it,  dug a winepress in it,  built a tower,  leased it to farmers,  went on a journey.
Matt. And when the time of the fruits approached, he sent his bondmen to the farmers to receive his fruits.
Matt. And the farmers having taken his bondmen, they beat one,  killed another,  stoned another.
Matt. Again, he sent other bondmen more than the first,  they did to them in like manner.
Matt. But finally he sent to them his son, saying, They will be made ashamed by my son.
Matt. But the farmers, when they saw the son, said among themselves, This is the heir, come, let us kill him,  possess his inheritance.
Matt. And having seized him, they cast him out of the vineyard,  killed him.
Matt. When therefore the lord of the vineyard comes, what will he do to those farmers?
Matt. They say to him, Evil men, he will miserably destroy them,  will lease out the vineyard to other farmers, who will render him the fruits in their seasons.
Matt. Jesus says to them, Did ye never read in the scriptures, The stone that those who build rejected, this came to be in the head of the corner. This happened from the Lord,  it is marvelous in our eyes?
Matt. Because of this I say to you, that the kingdom of God will be taken away from you,  will be given to a nation producing the fruits of it.
Matt. And he who falls on this stone will be shattered,  on whomever it may fall, it will grind him to dust.
Matt. And when the chief priests and the Pharisees heard his parables, they knew that he spoke about them.
Matt. And when they sought to seize him, they feared the multitudes, because they held him as a prophet.
Matt. And having responded, Jesus again spoke to them in parables, saying,
Matt. The kingdom of the heavens is like a man, a king who made a wedding for his son.
Matt. And he sent forth his bondmen to call those who were invited to the wedding festivities,  they did not want to come.
Matt. Again he sent forth other bondmen, saying, Speak to those who were invited, Behold, I have prepared my dinner. My oxen and my fatlings have been killed,  all things are ready. Come to the wedding festivities.
Matt. But having disregarded, they departed, one to his own farm, another to his merchandise,
Matt. and the others having seized his bondmen, abused and killed them.
Matt. But having heard that, the king was angry,  having sent forth his armies, he destroyed those murderers,  burned their city.
Matt. Then he says to his bondmen, The wedding is indeed ready,  those who were invited were not worthy.
Matt. Go ye therefore to the crossings of the ways,  as many as ye may find, call to the wedding festivities.
Matt. And those bondmen having departed into the roads, they gathered together all, as many as they found, both bad and good. And the wedding was filled with those who were dining.
Matt. But when the king came in to see those who were dining, he saw there a man who was not clothed with a wedding garment.
Matt. And he says to him, Friend, how did thou come in here not having a wedding garment? But he was speechless.
Matt. Then the king said to the helpers, After binding him hands and feet, take him away and cast him out into the outer darkness. There will be the weeping and the gnashing of teeth.
Matt. For many are called,  few chosen.
Matt. Then the Pharisees having departed, they took counsel how they might trap him in his talk.
Matt. And they send out their disciples to him, with the Herodians, saying, Teacher, we know that thou are true,  teach the way of God in truth,  it is not a concern to thee about a man, for thou look not to the personage of men.
Matt. Tell us therefore, what does it seem to thee? Is it permitted to give tribute to Caesar or not?
Matt. But Jesus having known their wickedness, said, Why do ye tempt me, ye hypocrites?
Matt. Exhibit to me the tribute money. And they brought to him a denarius.
Matt. And he says to them, Whose is this image and inscription?
Matt. They say to him, Caesar's. Then he says to them, Therefore, render the things of Caesar to Caesar,  the things of God to God.
Matt. And when they heard it, they marveled. And having left him, they departed.
Matt. On that day Sadducees came to him, those who claim to be no resurrection. And they questioned him, saying,
Matt. Teacher, Moses said, If some man dies, having no children, his brother shall marry his wife,  raise up seed to his brother.
Matt. Now there were with us seven brothers. And the first having married perished. And having no seed left his wife to his brother.
Matt. Likewise also the second,  the third, until the seventh.
Matt. And last of all, the woman also died.
Matt. In the resurrection therefore, which of the seven will she be wife? For they all had her.
Matt. But having answered, Jesus said to them, Ye are led astray, not knowing the scriptures, nor the power of God.
Matt. For in the resurrection they neither marry, nor are given in marriage,  are as agents of God in heaven.
Matt. But concerning the resurrection of the dead, have ye not read that which was spoken to you by God, saying,
Matt. I am the God of Abraham,  the God of Isaac,  the God of Jacob? God is not God of the dead,  of the living.
Matt. And when the multitudes heard it, they were astonished at his doctrine.
Matt. But the Pharisees, having heard that he silenced the Sadducees, they came together in the same place.
Matt. And one of them, a lawyer, questioned, trying him,  saying,
Matt. Teacher, which is the great commandment in the law?
Matt. And Jesus said to him, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with thy whole heart,  with thy whole soul,  with thy whole mind.
Matt. This is the first and great commandment.
Matt. And the second is like it, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself.
Matt. On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets.
Matt. Now the Pharisees having been gathered together, Jesus interrogated them, saying,
Matt. What does it seem to you about the Christ? Whose son is he? They say to him, Of David.
Matt. He says to them, How then does David in Spirit call him Lord, saying,
Matt. The Lord said to my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand until I place thine enemies a footstool of thy feet?
Matt. If David therefore calls him Lord, how is he his son?
Matt. And no man was able to answer him a word, nor did any man from that day dare to question him any more.
Matt. Then Jesus spoke to the multitudes and to his disciples, saying,
Matt. The scholars and the Pharisees sit on Moses' seat.
Matt. All things therefore, however many they may tell you to observe, observe and do,  do not ye according to their works, for they say,  do not.
Matt. For they bind heavy burdens and difficult to bear,  lay them on men's shoulders,  they do not want to move them with their finger.
Matt. But all their works they do in order to be seen by men. And they make broad their phylacteries,  enlarge the hems of their garments.
Matt. And they love the chief place at feasts,  the chief seats in the synagogues,
Matt. and the greetings in the marketplaces,  to be designated by men, Rabbi, Rabbi.
Matt. But be ye not designated Rabbi, for one is your leader, the Christ,  ye are all brothers.
Matt. And do not designate a father of you upon the earth, for one is your Father, he in the heavens.
Matt. And be ye not designated leaders, for one is your leader, the Christ.
Matt. But the greater of you will be your helper.
Matt. And he who will exalt himself will be made low,  he who will make himself low will be exalted.
Matt. Woe to you, scholars and Pharisees, hypocrites! Because ye close up the kingdom of the heavens ahead of men. For ye enter not in, nor do ye allow those who are entering to enter in.
Matt. But woe to you, scholars and Pharisees, hypocrites! Because ye devour widows' houses,  praying long in pretence. Because of this ye will receive greater condemnation.
Matt. Woe to you, scholars and Pharisees, hypocrites! Because ye encompass the sea and the land to make one proselyte,  when it happens, ye make him twice more a son of hell than yourselves.
Matt. Woe to you, ye blind guides, who say, Whoever may swear by the temple, it is nothing,  whoever may swear by the gold of the temple, he is obligated.
Matt. Ye foolish and blind men, for which is greater, the gold, or the temple that makes the gold sacred?
Matt. And, Whoever may swear by the altar, it is nothing,  whoever may swear by the gift upon it, he is obligated.
Matt. Ye foolish and blind men, for which is greater, the gift, or the altar that makes the gift sacred?
Matt. He therefore who swears by the altar, swears by it,  by all things on it.
Matt. And he who swears by the temple, swears by it,  by him who dwells in it.
Matt. And he who swears by heaven, swears by the throne of God,  by him who sits upon it.
Matt. Woe to you, scholars and Pharisees, hypocrites! Because ye tithe the mint and the anise and the cummin,  have omitted the weightier matters of the law-justice and mercy and faith. These things must be done,  not neglecting those things.
Matt. Ye blind guides, who strain out the gnat,  swallow the camel.
Matt. Woe to you, scholars and Pharisees, hypocrites! Because ye cleanse the outside of the cup and of the platter,  inside they are full of plunder and unrighteousness.
Matt. Thou blind Pharisee, cleanse first the inside of the cup and of the platter, so that the outside of them may also become clean.
Matt. Woe to you, scholars and Pharisees, hypocrites! Because ye are like whitewashed tombs, which indeed appear beautiful outwardly,  inside are full of dead men's bones,  of all uncleanness.
Matt. In this way also, ye indeed outwardly appear righteous to men,  inside ye are full of hypocrisy and lawlessness.
Matt. Woe to you, scholars and Pharisees, hypocrites! Because ye build the tombs of the prophets,  adorn the sepulchers of the righteous,
Matt. and say, If we had been in the days of our fathers, we would not have been partakers with them in the blood of the prophets.
Matt. So then ye testify to yourselves that ye are sons of those who murdered the prophets.
Matt. Then fill ye up the measure of your fathers.
Matt. Ye serpents, ye offspring of vipers, how will ye escape from the damnation of hell?
Matt. Because of this, behold, I send to you prophets,  wise men,  scholars. And some of them ye will kill and crucify,  some of them ye will scourge in your synagogues,  will persecute from city to city,
Matt. so that upon you may come all the righteous blood shed on the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel to the blood of Zachariah son of Barachiah, whom ye murdered between the sanctuary and the altar.
Matt. Truly I say to you, that all these things will come upon this generation.
Matt. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, who kills the prophets,  stones those who have been sent to her. How often I wanted to gathered thy children together the way a hen gathers her chicks under her wings,  ye would not.
Matt. Behold, your house is left to you desolate.
Matt. For I say to you, ye will, no, not see me henceforth, until ye say, Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord.
Matt. And when Jesus departed he was going from the temple. And his disciples came near to exhibit to him the buildings of the temple.
Matt. But Jesus said to them, Do ye not see all these things? Truly I say to you, there will be left here, no, not a stone upon a stone, that will not be thrown down.
Matt. And as he sat on the mount of Olives, the disciples came to him privately, saying, Tell us, when will these things be? And what is the sign of thy coming,  of the termination of the age?
Matt. And having answered, Jesus said to them, See that not any man may lead you astray.
Matt. For many will come in my name, saying, I am the Christ,  will lead many astray.
Matt. And ye are going to hear of wars and rumors of wars. See that ye not be alarmed, for all the things must happen,  the end is not yet.
Matt. For nation will rise against nation,  kingdom against kingdom,  there will be famines and plagues and earthquakes in places.
Matt. But all these things are the beginning of travail.
Matt. Then they will deliver you up for tribulation,  will kill you,  ye will be hated by all the nations because of my name.
Matt. And then many will be caused to stumble,  they will betray each other and will hate each other.
Matt. And many false prophets will arise,  will lead many astray.
Matt. And because of the increased lawlessness, the love of the many will become cold.
Matt. But he who endures to the end, this man will be saved.
Matt. And this good news of the kingdom will be proclaimed in the whole world for a testimony to all the nations,  then the end will come.
Matt. When therefore ye see the abomination of desolation that was spoken of through Daniel the prophet, standing in the holy place (let him who reads understand),
Matt. then let those in Judea flee to the mountains.
Matt. Let the man on the housetop not go down to take things from his house.
Matt. And let the man in the field not return back to take his clothes.
Matt. And woe to those who have in the womb and to those who suckle in those days.
Matt. And pray ye that your flight may not happen in winter, nor on a sabbath,
Matt. for then there will be great tribulation, such as not has happened from the beginning of the world until now, nor, no, it will not happen.
Matt. And if those days were not shortened, no flesh would be saved. But because of the chosen those days will be shortened.
Matt. Then if any man should say to you, Lo, here is the Christ, or, Here, believe ye not.
Matt. For there will arise false Christs and false prophets,  they will give great signs and wonders, so as to lead astray, if possible, even the chosen.
Matt. Behold, I have foretold it to you.
Matt. If therefore they should say to you, Behold, he is in the wilderness, do not go forth. Behold, he is in the inner chambers, do not believe.
Matt. For as the lightning comes out from the east,  shines as far as the west, so also will be the coming of the Son of man.
Matt. For wherever the carcass may be, there the vultures will be gathered together.
Matt. But straightaway after the tribulation of those days the sun will be darkened,  the moon will not give its light. And the stars will fall from the sky,  the powers of the heavens will be shaken.
Matt. And then the sign of the Son of man will appear in the sky. And then all the tribes of the earth will beat the breast,  they will see the Son of man coming in the clouds of the sky with power and much glory.
Matt. And he will send forth his agents with a great trumpet sound,  they will gather together his chosen from the four winds, from the boundaries of the heavens-as far as their boundaries.
Matt. Now learn a parable from the fig tree. When its branch now becomes tender,  sprouts leaves, ye know that the summer is near.
Matt. So ye also, when ye see all these things, know that it is near, at the doors.
Matt. Truly I say to you, this generation will, no, not pass away, until all these things happen.
Matt. The sky and the earth will pass away,  my words may, no, not pass away.
Matt. But about that day and hour no man knows, not even the agents of the heavens, except my Father only.
Matt. And as the days of Noah, so also will be the coming of the Son of man.
Matt. For as in the days before the flood they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage until that day Noah entered into the ark.
Matt. And they knew not until the flood came,  took them all away. So also will be the coming of the Son of man.
Matt. Then two men will be in the field, one is taken,  one is left.
Matt. Two women grinding at the mill, one is taken,  one is left.
Matt. Watch therefore, because ye know not at what hour your Lord comes.
Matt. But know this, that if the house-ruler had known in what watch the thief was coming, he would have watched,  would not have allowed his house to be broken into.
Matt. Because of this ye also be ready, because in that hour ye think not the Son of man comes.
Matt. Who then is the faithful and wise bondman, whom his lord appointed over his service, to give them the provision on time?
Matt. Blessed is that bondman, whom his lord when he comes will find so doing.
Matt. Truly I say to you, that he will appoint him over all things being possessed by him.
Matt. But if that evil bondman should say in his heart, My lord is late coming,
Matt. and should begin to beat the fellow bondmen,  to eat and drink with the drunken,
Matt. the lord of that bondman will come in a day that he does not expect,  in an hour that he is not aware,
Matt. and he will cut him in two,  place his share with the hypocrites. There will be the weeping and the gnashing of teeth.
Matt. Then the kingdom of heaven will be like ten virgins, who, having taken their lamps, went forth to the bridegroom's gathering.
Matt. And five of them were wise,  five were foolish,
Matt. foolish women, who, having taken their lamps, took no olive oil with them.
Matt. But the wise took olive oil in their vessels with their lamps.
Matt. Now while the bridegroom delayed, they all slumbered and slept.
Matt. But at midnight a shout occurred, Behold, the bridegroom comes! Go ye forth for his gathering.
Matt. Then all those virgins were roused,  put their lamps in order.
Matt. And the foolish said to the wise, Give us from your olive oil, because our lamps are going out.
Matt. But the wise answered, saying, Perhaps there may not be enough for us and you. But go ye rather to those who sell,  buy for yourselves.
Matt. And while they went to buy, the bridegroom came. And the prepared entered in with him for the wedding festivities,  the door was shut.
Matt. But afterward the other virgins also came, saying, Lord, Lord, open to us.
Matt. But having answered, he said, Truly I say to you, I know you not.
Matt. Watch therefore, because ye know not the day nor the hour in which the Son of man comes.
Matt. For, like a man going on a journey, he called his own bondmen,  delivered to them the things possessed by him.
Matt. And to one he gave five talents, to another two, to another one, to each according to his personal ability,  straightaway he journeyed.
Matt. And having departed, the man who received the five talents worked with them,  made five other talents.
Matt. And likewise also the man of the two gained two others.
Matt. But having departed, the man who received the one dug in the ground,  hid his lord's silver.
Matt. Now after a long time the lord of those bondmen comes,  takes up accounting with them.
Matt. And having come, the man who received the five talents brought five other talents, saying, Lord, thou delivered five talents to me, lo, I have gained five other talents besides them.
Matt. And his lord said to him, Well, good and faithful bondman. Thou were faithful over a few things, I will appoint thee over many things. Enter thou into the joy of thy lord.
Matt. And also having come, the man who received the two talents said, Lord, thou delivered two talents to me, lo, I have gained two other talents besides them.
Matt. His lord said to him, Well, good and faithful bondman. Thou were faithful over a few things, I will appoint thee over many things. Enter thou into the joy of thy lord.
Matt. And the man who received the one talent also having come, said, Lord, I knew thee that thou are a hard man, reaping where thou did not sow,  gathering from where thou did not scatter.
Matt. And after being afraid, having gone, I hid thy talent in the ground. Lo, thou have thine own.
Matt. But having answered, his lord said to him, Thou evil and lazy bondman, thou knew that I reap where I sowed not,  gather from where I did not scatter.
Matt. Thou ought therefore to have placed my silver with the bankers,  having come I would have received back my own with interest.
Matt. Take ye therefore the talent from him,  give it to him who has the ten talents.
Matt. For to every man who has will be given,  he will have abundance,  from him who has not, even what he has will be taken away from him.
Matt. And cast ye the unprofitable bondman into the outer darkness. There will be the weeping and the gnashing of teeth.
Matt. But when the Son of man comes in his glory,  all the holy agents with him, then he will sit on the throne of his glory.
Matt. And all the nations will be gathered before him,  he will separate them from each other, as the shepherd separates the sheep from the goats.
Matt. And he will truly place the sheep at his right hand,  the goats at the left.
Matt. Then the King will say to those at his right hand, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.
Matt. For I was hungry,  ye gave me to eat. I was thirsty,  ye gave me to drink. I was a stranger,  ye took me in,
Matt. naked,  ye clothed me. I was feeble,  ye came to help me. I was in prison,  ye came to me.
Matt. Then the righteous will answer him, saying, Lord, when did we see thee hungering,  fed thee, or thirsting,  gave thee drink?
Matt. And when did we see thee a stranger,  took thee in, or naked,  clothed thee?
Matt. And when did we see thee weak, or in prison,  came to thee?
Matt. And having answered, the King will say to them, Truly I say to you, inasmuch as ye did it to one of these my brothers, the least, ye did it to me.
Matt. Then he will also say to those at the left hand, Depart from me, ye accursed, into the eternal fire prepared for the devil and his agents.
Matt. For I was hungry,  ye did not give me to eat, I was thirsty,  ye gave me no drink,
Matt. I was a stranger,  ye did not take me in, naked,  ye did not clothe me, weak,  in prison,  ye did not come to help me.
Matt. Then they will also answer, saying, Lord, when did we see thee hungering, or thirsting, or a stranger, or naked, or weak, or in prison,  did not serve thee?
Matt. Then he will answer them, saying, Truly I say to you, inasmuch as ye did it not to one of these least, ye did it not to me.
Matt. And these will go away into eternal punishment,  the righteous into eternal life.
Matt. And it came to pass, when Jesus had finished all these saying, he said to his disciples,
Matt. Ye know that after two days the Passover comes,  the Son of man is betrayed to be crucified.
Matt. Then the chief priests,  the scholars,  the elders of the people, assembled together to the courtyard of the high priest, who was called Caiaphas,
Matt. and they deliberated so that they might take Jesus by trickery,  kill him.
Matt. But they said, Not during the feast, lest an uproar develop among people.
Matt. Now when Jesus happened to be in Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper,
Matt. a woman came to him having an alabaster cruse of precious ointment,  she poured it upon his head as he sat relaxing.
Matt. But when his disciples saw it, they were indignant, saying, Why this waste?
Matt. For this ointment could have been sold for much,  given to the poor.
Matt. But Jesus knowing it, he said to them, Why do ye cause troubles to the woman? For she has wrought a good work upon me.
Matt. For ye always have the poor with you,  ye do not always have me.
Matt. For by pouring this ointment upon my body, she did it for my burial.
Matt. Truly I say to you, wherever this good news may be proclaimed in the whole world, what this woman did will also be told for a memorial of her.
Matt. Then one of the twelve, who was called Judas Iscariot, having gone to the chief priests,
Matt. he said, What are ye willing to give me,  I will deliver him to you? And they weighed out to him thirty silver pieces.
Matt. And from that time he sought a favorable opportunity so that he might betray him.
Matt. Now on the first day of unleavened bread the disciples came to Jesus, saying, Where do thou want that we should prepare for thee to eat the Passover?
Matt. And he said, Go into the city to a certain man,  say to him, The teacher says, My time is near. I keep the Passover with my disciples with thee.
Matt. And the disciples did as Jesus arranged for them,  they prepared the Passover.
Matt. Now having become evening, he was sitting with the twelve.
Matt. And as they were eating, he said, Truly I say to you, that one of you will betray me.
Matt. And being exceedingly sorrowful, they began, each of them, to say to him, Is it I, Lord?
Matt. And having answered, he said, He who dipped his hand with me in the dish, this man will betray me.
Matt. The Son of man indeed goes as it is written about him,  woe to that man through whom the Son of man is betrayed! It were good for him if that man had not been born.
Matt. And Judas (the man who betrayed him) having answered, he said, Is it I, Rabbi? He says to him, Thou have said.
Matt. And as they were eating, Jesus, having taken bread, having expressed thanks, broke in pieces,  he gave to the disciples,  said, Take, eat, this is my body.
Matt. And having taken the cup, having expressed thanks, he gave to them, saying, All ye drink of it,
Matt. for this is my blood of the new covenant, which is shed on behalf of many for remission of sins.
Matt. But I say to you, that I will, no, not drink of this fruit of the grapevine henceforth until that day when I drink it new with you in my Father's kingdom.
Matt. And having sung a hymn, they went out to the mount of Olives.
Matt. Then Jesus says to them, All ye will be caused to stumble by me in this night, for it is written, I will strike the shepherd,  the sheep of the flock will be scattered.
Matt. But after I am raised up, I will go before you into Galilee.
Matt. But having answered, Peter said to him, If all men will be caused to stumble by thee, I will never be caused to stumble.
Matt. Jesus said to him, Truly I say to thee, that in this night, before a cock sounds, thou will deny me thrice.
Matt. Peter says to him, Even if I must die with thee, I will, no, not deny thee. And likewise also, said all the disciples.
Matt. Then Jesus comes with them to a place called Gethsemane,  he says to his disciples, Sit ye here until, after going, I may pray there.
Matt. And having taken Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, he began to be sorrowful and distressed.
Matt. Then Jesus says to them, My soul is deeply grieved, as far as of death. Remain ye here and watch with me.
Matt. And having gone forward a little, he fell on his face praying,  saying, My Father, if it be possible, may this cup pass from me. Nevertheless, not as I want,  as thou.
Matt. And he comes to the disciples,  finds them sleeping. And he says to Peter, So ye could not watch with me one hour.
Matt. Watch and pray that ye enter not into temptation. Truly, the spirit is willing,  the flesh is weak.
Matt. Having gone again a second time, he prayed, saying, My Father, if it is not possible for this cup to pass from me, except I drink it, may thy will happen.
Matt. And having come again, he finds them sleeping, for their eyes were heavy.
Matt. And when he left them, having gone away again, he prayed a third time, saying again the same statement.
Matt. Then he comes to his disciples,  says to them, Sleep what remains,  take rest. Behold, the hour has come near,  the Son of man is betrayed into the hands of sinners.
Matt. Awake, we go. Behold, he who betrays me has come near.
Matt. And while he was still speaking, lo, Judas, one of the twelve, came,  with him a great multitude with swords and clubs from the chief priest and elders of the people.
Matt. Now the man who betrayed him gave them a sign, saying, Whomever I may kiss is he. Seize him.
Matt. And straightaway having come to Jesus, he said, Hail, Rabbi,  kissed him much.
Matt. And Jesus said to him, Friend, why are thou here? Then having come, they threw their hands on Jesus,  seized him.
Matt. And behold, one of those with Jesus, having stretched out a hand, drew his sword,  when he struck the bondman of the high priest, he cut off his ear.
Matt. Then Jesus says to him, Return thy sword into its place, for all those who take a sword will die by a sword.
Matt. Or do thou think that I cannot now call my Father,  he will provide to me more than twelve legions of agents?
Matt. How then would the scriptures be fulfilled that it is necessary to happen this way?
Matt. In that hour Jesus said to the multitudes, Did ye come out as against a robber with swords and clubs to seize me? I sat daily with you teaching in the temple,  ye did not seize me.
Matt. But all this has come to pass, so that the scriptures of the prophets might be fulfilled. Then all the disciples fled, having forsook him.
Matt. And those who seized Jesus led him away to Caiaphas the high priest where the scholars and the elders were assembled together.
Matt. But Peter followed him from afar, as far as the courtyard of the high priest. And having entered inside, he sat with the subordinates to see the outcome.
Matt. Now the chief priests and the elders and the whole council sought false testimony against Jesus, so that they might put him to death,
Matt. and they did not find it. And although many false witnesses came, they did not find it.
Matt. But finally two false witnesses having come, they said, This man said, I am able to destroy the temple of God,  to build it by three days.
Matt. And the high priest having stood up, he said to him, Answer thou nothing? What do these testify against thee?
Matt. But Jesus was silent. And having responded, the high priest said to him, I adjure thee by the living God, that thou tell us if thou are the Christ, the Son of God.
Matt. Jesus says to him, Thou have said. Nevertheless I say to you, Henceforth ye will see the Son of man sitting at the right hand of Power,  coming in the clouds of the sky.
Matt. Then the high priest tore his garments, saying, He has blasphemed. What further need have we of witnesses? Behold, now ye heard his blasphemy.
Matt. What does it seem to you? Having answered, they said, He is deserving of death.
Matt. Then they spat in his face and struck him with a fist. And some slapped him,
Matt. saying, Prophesy to us, thou Christ. Who is he who struck thee?
Matt. Now Peter was sitting outside in the courtyard,  one servant girl came to him, saying, Thou also were with Jesus the Galilean.
Matt. But he denied before them all, saying, I do not know what thou say.
Matt. And when he was gone out into the porch, another woman saw him,  says to them there, This man was also with Jesus the Nazarene.
Matt. And again he denied with an oath, I do not know the man.
Matt. And after a little while those who stood, having approached, said to Peter, Surely thou also are of them, for thy accent even makes thee apparent.
Matt. Then he began to curse vehemently and to swear, I do not know the man. And straightaway a cock sounded.
Matt. And Peter remembered the saying that Jesus said to him, Before a cock sounds, thou will deny me thrice. And having gone outside, he wept bitterly.
Matt. But having become morning, all the chief priests and the elders of the people held consultation against Jesus in order to condemn him to death.
Matt. And having bound him, they led him away and delivered him to Pontius Pilate the governor.
Matt. Then Judas, who betrayed him, after seeing that he was condemned, having repented, he brought back the thirty silver pieces to the chief priests and elders,
Matt. saying, I sinned, having betrayed innocent blood. But they said, What is it to us? See thou to it.
Matt. And having cast down the silver pieces in the temple, he departed,  after going away, he hanged himself.
Matt. And after taking the silver pieces, the chief priests said, It is not permitted to put them into the treasury, since it is a price of blood.
Matt. And having held consultation, they bought the potter's field with them for burial for foreigners.
Matt. Therefore that field was called the field of blood, to this day.
Matt. Then that which was spoken through Jeremiah the prophet was fulfilled, which says, And they took the thirty silver pieces, the price of him who was valued, whom they valued from the sons of Israel,
Matt. and they gave them for the potter's field, as the Lord appointed me.
Matt. Now Jesus stood before the governor,  the governor questioned him, saying, Are thou the king of the Jews? And Jesus said to him, Thou say.
Matt. And when he was accused by the chief priests and elders, he answered nothing.
Matt. Then Pilate says to him, Do thou not hear how many things they testify against thee?
Matt. And he did not answer him, not even one word, so as for the governor to marvel greatly.
Matt. Now during a feast the governor had been accustomed to release to the crowd one prisoner whom they wanted.
Matt. And they had then a notorious prisoner called Barabbas.
Matt. When therefore they were gathered together, Pilate said to them, Whom do ye want I should release to you? Barabbas, or Jesus who is called Christ?
Matt. For he knew that they delivered him up because of envy.
Matt. And while he was sitting on the judgment seat, his wife sent to him, saying, There is nothing for thee and that righteous man. For I suffered many things this day in a dream because of him.
Matt. But the chief priests and the elders persuaded the multitudes that they should ask for Barabbas,  destroy Jesus.
Matt. Now the governor having answered, he said to them, Which of the two do ye want I would release to you? And they said, Barabbas.
Matt. Pilate says to them, What then shall I do to Jesus who is called Christ? They all say to him, He should be crucified.
Matt. And the governor said, For what evil has he done? But they cried out even more, saying, He should be crucified.
Matt. And when Pilate saw that he was accomplishing nothing,  rather an uproar was developing, after taking water, he washed his hands in front of the multitude, saying, I am innocent of the blood of this righteous man. See ye to it.
Matt. And having answered, all the people said, His blood be on us,  on our children.
Matt. Then he released Barabbas to them,  having scourged Jesus he delivered him so that he would be crucified.
Matt. Then the soldiers of the governor, having taken Jesus into the Praetorium, gathered the whole band to him.
Matt. And having stripped him, they put a scarlet robe on him.
Matt. And having woven a crown of thorns, they put it upon his head,  a reed in his right hand. And having knelt down before him, they ridiculed him, saying, Hail, king of the Jews!
Matt. And having spat upon him, they took the reed and were striking him on his head.
Matt. And after they ridiculed him, they took the robe off of him,  put his clothes on him,  led him away in order to crucify.
Matt. And while coming out, they found a man of Cyrene, Simon by name. They drafted this man, so that he might take his cross.
Matt. And having come to a place called Golgotha, that is called, the place of a skull,
Matt. they gave him vinegar to drink mingled with gall. And having tasted it, he would not drink.
Matt. And when they crucified him, they divided his garments, casting a lot.
Matt. And as they sat, they keep watch over him there.
Matt. And they set up over his head his accusation written, THIS IS JESUS THE KING OF THE JEWS.
Matt. Then two robbers are crucified with him, one at the right hand and one at the left.
Matt. And those who passed by reviled him, shaking their heads,
Matt. and saying, Thou who destroy the temple,  build it in three days, save thyself. If thou are the Son of God, come down from the cross.
Matt. And likewise also the chief priests, ridiculing with the scholars,  elders,  Pharisees, said,
Matt. He saved others, he cannot save himself. If he is the king of Israel, let him now come down from the cross,  we will believe in him.
Matt. He trusted in God, let him rescue him now, if he wants him, for he said, I am the Son of God.
Matt. And also the robbers who were crucified with him reviled him the same way.
Matt. Now from the sixth hour darkness developed over all the land until the ninth hour.
Matt. And about the ninth hour Jesus cried out in a great voice, saying, Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani? That is, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
Matt. And some of those who stood there, when they heard it, said, This man calls Elijah.
Matt. And straightaway one of them, after running,  having taken a sponge,  having filled it with vinegar, put it on a reed,  gave him to drink.
Matt. But the others said, Leave thou be. We might see if Elijah comes he will save him.
Matt. And Jesus, having cried out again in a great voice, yielded up his spirit.
Matt. And behold, the curtain of the temple was torn in two from the top to the bottom,  the earth quaked,  the rocks split,
Matt. and the sepulchers were opened,  many bodies of the sanctified who have been asleep arose.
Matt. And having come forth out of the sepulchers after his resurrection they entered into the holy city and appeared to many.
Matt. Now the centurion,  those with him watching over Jesus, when they saw the earthquake,  the things that happened, they feared greatly, saying, Truly this was the Son of God.
Matt. And many women were there watching from afar, who followed Jesus from Galilee, serving him,
Matt. among whom was Mary Magdalene,  Mary the mother of James and Joses,  the mother of the sons of Zebedee.
Matt. And having become evening, there came a rich man from Arimathaea, named Joseph, who also himself was discipled by Jesus.
Matt. This man having come to Pilate, requested the body of Jesus. Then Pilate commanded the body to be given.
Matt. And Joseph having taken the body, wrapped it in a clean linen cloth,
Matt. and laid it in his own new sepulcher, which he hewed out in the rock. And having rolled a great stone to the door of the sepulcher, he departed.
Matt. And Mary Magdalene,  the other Mary were there, sitting opposite the tomb.
Matt. Now on the morrow, which is after the Preparation, the chief priests and the Pharisees came together to Pilate,
Matt. saying, Sir, we remember that that deceiver said while he was still alive, After three days I am raised.
Matt. Command therefore to secure the tomb until the third day, lest his disciples having come by night steal him away,  say to the people, He was raised from the dead. And the last error will be worse than the first.
Matt. Pilate said to them, Ye have security. Go, make it as secure as ye know how.
Matt. And having gone, they made the tomb secure, with the security having sealed the stone.
Matt. Now late on the sabbath day, being dawn toward the first day of the week, Mary Magdalene and the other Mary came to see the tomb.
Matt. And behold, a great earthquake occurred, for an agent of the Lord, having descended from heaven, having come, he rolled the stone away from the door and sat upon it.
Matt. And his appearance was as lightning and his clothing white as snow.
Matt. And those watching over shook from fear of him,  became as dead men.
Matt. And having responded, the agent said to the women, Fear ye not, for I know that ye seek Jesus, who was crucified.
Matt. He is not here, for he was raised as he said. Come, see the place where the Lord lay.
Matt. And after going quickly, tell his disciples, He was raised from the dead,  lo, he goes before you into Galilee. There ye will see him. Behold, I have told you.
Matt. And after coming out quickly from the sepulcher with fear and great joy, they ran to notify his disciples.
Matt. And as they were going to tell his disciples, behold, Jesus also met them, saying, Hail. And having come, they held his feet and worshiped him.
Matt. Then Jesus says to them, Fear not. Go notify my brothers that they should depart into Galilee,  there they will see me.
Matt. Now while they were going, behold, some of the security having come into the city, reported to the chief priests all the things that happened.
Matt. And after assembling with the elders,  having taken consultation, they gave many silver pieces to the soldiers, saying,
Matt. Say ye, His disciples, having come by night, stole him from us while we slept.
Matt. And if this should be heard by the governor, we will persuade him,  will make you worry free.
Matt. And having taken the silver pieces, they did as they were instructed. And this saying was spread abroad among the Jews until this day.
Matt. But the eleven disciples went for Galilee to the mountain where Jesus arranged for them.
Matt. And when they saw him, they worshiped him,  men doubted.
Matt. And Jesus having come, he spoke to them, saying, All authority in heaven and on earth was given to me.
Matt. After going, make ye disciples of all the nations, immersing them into the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit,
Matt. teaching them to observe all things, as many as I commanded you. And lo, I am with you all the days, until the end of the age. Truly.
Mark
Mark. The beginning of the good news of Jesus Christ, the Son of God.
Mark. As it is written in the prophets, Behold, I send my agent before thy face, who will prepare thy way before thee.
Mark. The voice of a man crying out in the wilderness: Prepare ye the way of the Lord. Make his paths straight.
Mark. It came to pass, that John was immersing in the wilderness and preaching an immersion of repentance for remission of sins.
Mark. And all the land of Judea and the Jerusalemites went out to him,  they were all immersed by him in the river Jordan, confessing their sins.
Mark. And John was clothed with camel's hair and a leather belt around his waist,  eating locusts and wild honey.
Mark. And he preached, saying, A man mightier than I comes after me of whom I am not worthy, having stooped down, to loosen the strap of his shoes.
Mark. I indeed immersed you in water,  he will immerse you in the Holy Spirit.
Mark. And it came to pass in those days, that Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee,  was immersed by John in the Jordan.
Mark. And straightaway coming up out of the water, he saw the heavens divided,  the Spirit descending upon him as a dove.
Mark. And a voice occurred out of the heavens, Thou are my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.
Mark. And straightaway the Spirit drives him forth into the wilderness.
Mark. And he was there in the wilderness forty days tempted by Satan. And he was with the wild beasts. And the agents served him.
Mark. Now after John was delivered up, Jesus came into Galilee proclaiming the good news of God,
Mark. and saying, The time is fulfilled,  the kingdom of God has come near. Repent ye,  believe in the good news.
Mark. And walking beside the sea of Galilee he saw Simon and Andrew his brother, the son of Simon, casting a net in the sea, for they were fishermen.
Mark. And Jesus said to them, Come ye behind me,  I will make you to become fishermen of men.
Mark. And straightaway they left the nets,  followed him.
Mark. And having advanced a little from there he saw James the son of Zebedee,  John his brother, who were also in the boat mending the nets.
Mark. And straightaway he called them. And having left their father Zebedee in the boat with the workmen, they went behind him.
Mark. And they entered into Capernaum,  straightaway on the sabbath day, having entered into the synagogue, he taught.
Mark. And they were astonished at his teaching, for he was teaching them as having authority,  not as the scholars.
Mark. And a man was in their synagogue with an unclean spirit. And he cried out,
Mark. saying, Oh no! What is with us and with thee, Jesus of Nazareth? Did thou come to destroy us? I know thee who thou are, the Holy man of God.
Mark. And Jesus rebuked him, saying, Be thou muzzled,  come out of him.
Mark. And the unclean spirit, having convulsed him and having cried in a great voice, came out of him.
Mark. And they were all amazed, so as to question among themselves, saying, What is this? What is this new doctrine, that he commands with authority,  the unclean spirits also obey him?
Mark. And his fame went forth straightaway into the entire region around Galilee.
Mark. And straightaway, when they came forth out of the synagogue they came into the house of Simon and Andrew, with James and John.
Mark. But Simon's mother-in-law lay feverish,  straightaway they tell him about her.
Mark. And upon coming, having taken hold of her hand, he raised her up and the fever left her. And straightaway she served them.
Mark. And having become evening when the sun set they brought to him all who were faring badly,  those who were demon-possessed.
Mark. And the whole city was gathered together near the door.
Mark. And he healed many who were faring badly with various diseases,  cast out many demons. And he did not allow the demons to speak, because they had recognized him.
Mark. And having risen early, very much in the night, he came out and departed into a desolate place,  prayed there.
Mark. And Simon and those with him searched for him.
Mark. And having found him, they say to him, All are seeking thee.
Mark. And he says to them, Let us go into the nearby towns, so that I may preach there also. For I came forth for this.
Mark. And he was preaching in their synagogues in all Galilee,  casting out the demons.
Mark. And a leper comes to him beseeching him,  kneeling down to him,  saying to him, If thou will thou can make me clean.
Mark. And Jesus, having felt compassion, having reached out his hand, he touched him,  says to him, I will, be thou clean.
Mark. And after he spoke, straightaway the leprosy departed from him,  he was cleansed.
Mark. And having strictly warned him, straightaway he sent him out.
Mark. And he says to him, See thou say nothing to any man,  go, show thyself to the priest,  bring for thy cleansing the things that Moses commanded for a testimony to them.
Mark. But having gone out, he began to proclaim it much,  to spread abroad the matter, so as for him to no longer be able to enter openly into a city,  was outside in desolate places. And they came to him from all directions.
Mark. And having again entered into Capernaum, after some days it was heard that he was in a house.
Mark. And straightaway many were gathered together, so as to accommodate no more, not even near the door. And he spoke the word to them.
Mark. And they come bringing to him a paralyzed man, being taken by four men.
Mark. And not being able to come near to him because of the crowd, they uncovered the roof where he was. And when they had broken through, they let down the bed on which the paralyzed man lay.
Mark. And having seen their faith, Jesus says to the paralyzed man, Child, thy sins are forgiven thee.
Mark. But some of the scholars were sitting there,  deliberating in their hearts,
Mark. Why does this man speak blasphemies this way. Who can forgive sins but one, God?
Mark. And straightaway Jesus, having perceived in his spirit that they so deliberated within themselves, said to them, Why do ye deliberate these things in your hearts?
Mark. Which is easier, to say to the paralyzed man, Thy sins are forgiven thee, or to say, Arise,  take up thy bed and walk?
Mark. But that ye may know that the Son of man has authority on earth to forgive sins (he says to the paralyzed man),
Mark. I say to thee, Arise,  take up thy bed,  go to thy house.
Mark. And straightaway he arose,  having taken up the bed, he went forth before them all, so as for all to be amazed,  to glorify God, saying, We never saw it like this.
Mark. And he went forth again by the sea,  all the multitude resorted to him,  he taught them.
Mark. And as he passed by he saw Levi the son of Alphaeus sitting at the tax office. And he says to him, Follow thou me. And having risen, he followed him.
Mark. And it came to pass, while he was dining in his house, that many tax collectors and sinners were dining with Jesus and his disciples, for there were many,  they followed him.
Mark. And the scholars of the Pharisees, when they saw him eating with the tax collectors and sinners, they said to his disciples, Why is it that he eats and drinks with tax collectors and sinners?
Mark. And when Jesus heard it he says to them, Those who are strong have no need of a physician,  those faring badly. I came not to call the righteous,  sinners for repentance.
Mark. And John's disciples and those of the Pharisees were fasting. And they come and say to him, Why do John's disciples and those of the Pharisees fast,  the disciples with you do not fast?
Mark. And Jesus said to them, The sons of the wedding hall cannot fast while the bridegroom is with them. As long as they have the bridegroom with them, they cannot fast.
Mark. But the days will come when the bridegroom is taken away from them,  then they will they fast in those day.
Mark. And no man sews a new patch of cloth on an old garment, otherwise the patch of it pulls away, the new from the old,  a tear becomes worse.
Mark. And no man puts new wine into old wineskins, otherwise the new wine bursts the wineskins,  the wine is spilled,  the wineskins will be destroyed. But new wine must be put into fresh wineskins.
Mark. And it came to pass, that he was passing through the grain fields on the sabbath day,  his disciples began to make a path while plucking the ears.
Mark. And the Pharisees said to him, Look, why are they doing what is not permitted on the sabbath day?
Mark. And he said to them, Did ye never read what David did when he had need,  was hungry, he and those with him?
Mark. How he entered into the house of God under Abiathar the high priest,  ate the loaves of the presentation, which is not permitted to eat except for the priests. And he also gave to those who were with him?
Mark. And he said to them, The sabbath came into being for sake of man,  not man for sake of the sabbath.
Mark. So then the Son of man is lord even of the sabbath.
Mark. And he entered again into the synagogue,  a man was there who had a withered hand.
Mark. And they watched him whether he would heal him on the sabbath day, so that they might accuse him.
Mark. And he says to the man who had a withered hand, Stand up in the midst.
Mark. And he says to them, Is it permitted to do good on the sabbath day or to do harm, to save life or to kill? But they were silent.
Mark. And having looked around on them with anger, being grieved at the callousness of their heart, he says to the man, Stretch forth thy hand. And he stretched it out,  his hand was restored as the other.
Mark. And the Pharisees having gone out, they straightaway were making a plot with the Herodians against him, how they might destroy him.
Mark. And Jesus withdrew with his disciples to the sea,  a great multitude from Galilee followed him.
Mark. And from Judea,  from Jerusalem,  from Idumaea,  beyond the Jordan,  around Tyre and Sidon, a great multitude, having heard how many things he did, came to him.
Mark. And he spoke to his disciples that a small boat would stay by him because of the crowd, lest they should throng him.
Mark. For he healed many, so as to press upon him, so that as many as had afflictions might touch him.
Mark. And the unclean spirits, whenever they saw him, fell down before him,  cried out, saying, Thou are the Son of God.
Mark. And he chided them much that they should not make him known.
Mark. And he goes up onto the mountain,  calls in those whom he himself wanted,  they went to him.
Mark. And he appointed twelve men, so that they might be with him,  that he might send them forth to preach,
Mark. and to have authority to heal diseases and to cast out demons.
Mark. And he added to Simon the name Peter;
Mark. and James the son of Zebedee,  John the brother of James,  he added to them the name Boanerges, which is, Sons of thunder;
Mark. and Andrew,  Philip,  Bartholomew,  Matthew,  Thomas,  James the son of Alphaeus,  Thaddaeus,  Simon the Canaanite,
Mark. and Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed him. And they come to a house.
Mark. And the multitude comes together again, so as for them, no, not even to be able to eat bread.
Mark. And when those with him heard it, they went out to grasp him, for they said, He is beside himself.
Mark. And the scholars who came down from Jerusalem said, He has Beelzebub, , By the ruler of the demons he casts out the demons.
Mark. And having summoned them, he said to them in parables, How can Satan cast out Satan?
Mark. And if a kingdom be divided against itself, that kingdom cannot stand.
Mark. And if a house be divided against itself, that house cannot stand.
Mark. And if Satan has rise up against himself,  is divided, he cannot stand,  has an end.
Mark. But no man, having enter into the house of the strong man, can plunder his goods unless he first binds the strong man,  then he may plunder his house.
Mark. Truly I say to you, that all the sins will be forgiven the sons of men,  the blasphemies, as many as they may blaspheme.
Mark. But whoever may blaspheme against the Holy Spirit has no forgiveness, into the age,  is deserving of eternal damnation,
Mark. because they said, He has an unclean spirit.
Mark. Then his brothers and mother come,  standing outside, they sent to him, calling him.
Mark. And a multitude was sitting around him,  they said to him, Behold, thy mother,  thy brothers,  thy sisters, outside seek for thee.
Mark. And he answered them, saying, Who is my mother and my brothers?
Mark. And having looked around at those who sat about him, he says, Behold, my mother and my brothers.
Mark. For whoever may do the will of God, the same is my brother and sister and mother.
Mark. And again he began to teach by the sea. And a great multitude was gathered to him, so as for him, after entering into the boat, to sit on the sea,  all the multitude was by the sea on the land.
Mark. And he taught them many things in parables,  said to them in his teaching,
Mark. Listen. Behold, the man who sows went forth to sow.
Mark. And it came to pass during the sowing, some fell by the path,  the birds came and devoured it.
Mark. And others fell on the rocky ground where it had not much soil. And straightaway it sprang up, because it had no depth of soil.
Mark. And when the sun was risen it was scorched,  because it had no root it dried out.
Mark. And others fell among the thorns,  the thorns grew up and choked it,  it gave no fruit.
Mark. And others fell into the good ground and gave fruit, coming up and increasing,  brought forth, one thirty,  one sixty,  one a hundred.
Mark. And he said, He who has ears to hear, let him hear.
Mark. And when he became alone, those around him, with the twelve, asked him the parable.
Mark. And he said to them, To you is given to know the mystery of the kingdom of God,  to those outside, all things occur in parables.
Mark. So that seeing they may see,  not perceive,  hearing they may hear,  not understand, lest they should turn,  the sins would be forgiven them.
Mark. And he says to them, Do ye not know this parable? And how will ye understand all the parables?
Mark. The man who sows sows the word.
Mark. And these are those by the path where the word is sown. And whenever they may hear, straightaway Satan comes,  takes away the word that has been sown in their hearts.
Mark. And these in like manner are those being sown upon the rocky places, who, whenever they may hear the word, straightaway receive it with joy.
Mark. And they have no root in themselves,  are temporary. Afterward, when tribulation or persecution develops because of the word, straightaway they are caused to stumble.
Mark. And these are those being sown in the thorns, who hear the word,
Mark. and the cares of this age,  the deceitfulness of wealth,  the cravings about other things entering in, choke the word,  it becomes unfruitful.
Mark. And these are those that were sown upon the good ground, who hear the word and receive it,  bear fruit, one thirty,  one sixty,  one a hundred.
Mark. And he said to them, Does the lamp come so that it might be put under the bushel or under the bed? Is it not so that it might be put on the lampstand?
Mark. For there is not anything hid, except that it may be revealed, nor become secret,  that it may come to be visible.
Mark. If any man has ears to hear, let him hear.
Mark. And he said to them, Watch what ye hear. By what measure ye measure, it will be measured to you,  to those who hear, it will be added to you.
Mark. For whoever has, to him it will be given. And he who has not, even what he has will be taken away from him.
Mark. And he said, Thus is the kingdom of God, as if a man should cast seed into the ground,
Mark. and should sleep and rise night and day,  the seed should sprout and lengthen, he knows not how.
Mark. For the earth bears fruit spontaneously, first the blade, then the ear, then the full grain in the ear.
Mark. But when the fruit yields, straightaway he sends forth the sickle, because the harvest has come.
Mark. And he said, To what shall we liken the kingdom of God? Or by what parable shall we compare it?
Mark. It is like a grain of the mustard plant, which, when it is sown in the ground, is smaller than all the seeds upon the ground.
Mark. Yet when it is sown, it goes up and becomes greater than all the plants,  it makes great branches, so that the birds of the sky can lodge under the shade of it.
Mark. And with many such parables he spoke the word to them, as they were able to hear it.
Mark. And he did not speak to them apart from a parable,  privately he explained all things to his disciples.
Mark. And on that day, having become evening, he says to them, Let us pass through to the other side.
Mark. And having sent the multitude away, they bring him along as he was in the boat. And other small boats were also with him.
Mark. And a great storm of wind develops,  the waves were thrown into the boat, so as for it now to be filling.
Mark. And he himself was in the stern sleeping on the cushion. And they awake him,  say to him, Teacher, does it not concern thee that we perish?
Mark. And having awaken, he rebuked the wind,  said to the sea, Be quiet! Silence! And the wind ceased,  it became a great calm.
Mark. And he said to them, Why are ye cowardly this way? How have ye no faith?
Mark. And they feared a great fear,  said to each other, Who then is this, that even the wind and the sea also obey him?
Mark. And they came to the other side of the sea into the country of the Gadarenes.
Mark. And when he came out of the boat, straightaway there met him out of the sepulchers a man with an unclean spirit who had his habitation among the sepulchers.
Mark. And no man was able to bind him, not even with chains.
Mark. Because he was often bound with shackles and chains,  the chains were pulled apart by him,  the shackles broken in pieces. And no man had strength to subdue him.
Mark. And always, night and day, in the mountains and in the sepulchers, he was crying out,  cutting himself with stones.
Mark. And when he saw Jesus from a distance, he ran and worshiped him.
Mark. And having cried out in a great voice, he said, What is with me and with thee, Jesus, thou Son of the Most High God? I adjure thee by God, do not torment me.
Mark. For he said to him, Come out from the man, thou unclean spirit.
Mark. And he demanded him, What is thy name? And he answered, saying, My name is Legion, because we are many.
Mark. And he besought him much that he would not send them outside of the territory.
Mark. Now there was near the mountain a great herd of swine feeding.
Mark. And all the demons besought him, saying, Send us into the swine, so that we may enter into them.
Mark. And straightaway, Jesus allowed them. And the unclean spirits having come out, entered into the swine. And the herd stampeded down the slope into the sea,  were drowned in the sea. And there were about two thousand.
Mark. And those who fed the swine fled,  reported in the city and in the fields. And they came to see what it was that happened.
Mark. And they come to Jesus,  see the man who was demon-possessed, sitting,  clothed,  in his right mind (the man who had the legion),  they were afraid.
Mark. And those who saw it related to them how it happened to the man who was demon-possessed,  about the swine.
Mark. And they began to beg him to depart from their borders.
Mark. And as he entered into the boat, the man who had been demon-possessed besought him that he might be with him.
Mark. But Jesus did not allow him,  says to him, Go to thy house to thy men,  report to them how much the Lord has done for thee,  was merciful to thee.
Mark. And he departed,  began to proclaim in Decapolis how much Jesus did for him. And all men marveled.
Mark. And when Jesus crossed over again in the boat to the other side, a great multitude gathered to him,  he was near the sea.
Mark. And behold, one of the synagogue rulers comes, Jairus by name. And having seen him, he falls at his feet,
Mark. and besought him much, saying, My little daughter has a terminal condition, so that having come, thou may lay thy hands on her, that she may be saved and will live.
Mark. And he went with him,  a great multitude followed him,  they thronged him.
Mark. And a certain woman, being with an issue of blood twelve years,
Mark. and having suffered many things by many physicians,  having spent all of her things,  was helped nothing,  who became worse instead,
Mark. when she heard about Jesus, having come in the crowd from behind, she touched his garment.
Mark. For she said, If I but touch his garments, I will be healed.
Mark. And straightaway the flow of her blood was dried up,  she knew in the body that she was healed of her scourge.
Mark. And straightaway, Jesus, when he recognized in himself that power went forth from him, having turned around in the crowd, he said, Who touched my garments?
Mark. And his disciples said to him, Thou see the multitude crowding thee,  thou say, Who touched me?
Mark. And he looked around to see the woman who did this thing.
Mark. But the woman fearing and trembling, knowing what has happened to her, came and fell down before him,  told him all the truth.
Mark. And he said to her, Daughter, thy faith has healed thee. Go in peace,  be healthy from thy scourge.
Mark. While he still spoke, they come from the synagogue ruler saying, Thy daughter died, why still trouble the teacher?
Mark. But straightaway, Jesus, having heard the word spoken, says to the ruler of the synagogue, Fear not, only believe.
Mark. And he allowed no man to accompany him except Peter,  James,  John the brother of James.
Mark. And he comes to the house of the synagogue ruler,  sees a commotion, much weeping and wailing.
Mark. And when he entered in, he says to them, Why do ye make a commotion,  weep? The child did not die,  sleeps.
Mark. And they ridiculed him. But he, having put them all out, takes the father of the child and the mother and those with him,  enters in where the child was lying.
Mark. And having taken the child's hand, he says to her, Talitha cumi. Which is, being interpreted, Little girl, I say to thee, awake.
Mark. And straightaway the little girl rose up and walked, for she was twelve years old. And they were amazed with a great amazement.
Mark. And he commanded them much that no man should know this. And he said to give her to eat.
Mark. And he went out from there,  came into his fatherland,  his disciples follow him.
Mark. And having become sabbath, he began to teach in the synagogue. And many who heard him were astonished, saying, How are these things in this man? and, What is the wisdom that was given to him,  such mighty works happen by his hands?
Mark. Is this not the carpenter, the son of Mary,  brother of James and Joses and Judah and Simon? And are not his sisters here with us? And they were offended by him.
Mark. But Jesus said to them, A prophet is not without honor, except in his fatherland,  among his kin,  in his house.
Mark. And he could do no mighty work there, none, except having laid his hands upon a few feeble men he healed them.
Mark. And he marveled because of their unbelief. And he went around the villages teaching.
Mark. And he summons the twelve,  began to send them forth in pairs. And he gave them authority over the unclean spirits.
Mark. And he commanded them that they should take up nothing for the way, except only a staff-no scrip, no bread, no copper in the belt-
Mark. but shod with sandals, , Do not wear two coats.
Mark. And he said to them, Wherever ye enter into a house, lodge there until ye depart from there.
Mark. And as many as might not receive you nor hear you, as ye depart from there, shake off the dust under your feet for a testimony to them. Truly I say to you, it will be more tolerable for Sodom or Gomorrah in the day of judgment than for that city.
Mark. And having departed, they preached that men should repent.
Mark. And they cast out many demons,  anointed many feeble men with olive oil,  healed them.
Mark. And king Herod heard, for his name had become well known. And he said, John, the man who immerses, was raised from the dead,  because of this the powers work in him.
Mark. Others said, He is Elijah,  others said, He is a prophet, like one of the prophets.
Mark. But Herod, when he heard, said, This is John whom I beheaded. He was raised from the dead.
Mark. For Herod himself having sent forth, he arrested John,  bound him in prison because of Herodias, his brother Philip's wife, because he married her.
Mark. For John said to Herod, It is not permitted for thee to have thy brother's wife.
Mark. And Herodias was resentful toward him,  wanted to kill him. And she could not,
Mark. for Herod feared John, knowing him to be a righteous and holy man,  he protected him. And having heard of him-the many things he was doing-he even heard of him gladly.
Mark. And having become an opportune day, when Herod on his birthday made a dinner for his chiefs,  the high captains,  the leading men of Galilee,
Mark. and the daughter of her (of Herodias) having come in and danced,  having pleased Herod and those who sat with the king, he said to the maiden, Ask of me whatever thou may want,  I will give to thee.
Mark. And he swore to her, Whatever thou may ask of me, I will give to thee, as much as half of my kingdom.
Mark. And having gone out, she said to her mother, What shall I ask? And she said, The head of John the immerser.
Mark. And having come in straightaway with haste to the king, she asked, saying, I want that thou may give me, of it on a platter, the head of John the immerser.
Mark. And the king, who became exceeding sorry, did not want to refuse her because of the oaths,  of those dining together.
Mark. And straightaway having sent an executioner, the king commanded his head to be brought. And having departed, he beheaded him in the prison,
Mark. and brought his head on a platter,  gave it to the maiden. And the maiden gave it to her mother.
Mark. And when his disciples heard, they came and took up his corpse,  laid it in a sepulcher.
Mark. And the apostles gather together to Jesus,  reported all to him,  how many things they did,  how many things they taught.
Mark. And he said to them, Come ye yourselves in private into a desolate place,  rest a while. For there were many coming and going,  they had no opportunity even to eat.
Mark. And they departed in the boat to a desolate place in private.
Mark. And they saw them going. And many recognized him,  ran together on foot there from all the cities. And they went before them,  came together to him.
Mark. And Jesus having come out, he saw a great multitude. And he felt compassion toward them, because they were as sheep not having a shepherd. And he began to teach them many things.
Mark. And now many an hour having come to pass, his disciples having come to him, they say, The place is desolate,  it is now many an hour.
Mark. Send them away, so that after going into the fields and villages around, they may buy loaves for themselves, for they do not have what they may eat.
Mark. But having answered, he said to them, Give ye them to eat. And they say to him, After departing, shall we buy loaves of two hundred denarii,  give them to eat?
Mark. And he says to them, How many loaves have ye? Go and see. And when they knew, they say, Five,  two fishes.
Mark. And he commanded them to sit down, all by companies upon the green grass.
Mark. And they sat down in groups, by hundreds and by fifties.
Mark. And after taking the five loaves and the two fishes, having looked up to heaven, he blessed,  broke the loaves in pieces,  he gave to the disciples so that they might set before them. And he distributed the two fishes to them all.
Mark. And they all ate,  were filled.
Mark. And they took up fragments, twelve baskets full,  from the fishes.
Mark. And those who ate the loaves were five thousand men.
Mark. And straightaway he compelled his disciples to enter into the boat,  to go ahead to the other side, to Bethsaida, while he himself would send the crowd away.
Mark. And after sending them away, he departed onto the mountain to pray.
Mark. And having become evening, the boat was in the midst of the sea,  he alone on the land.
Mark. And he saw them toiling in rowing, for the wind was against them. And about the fourth watch of the night he comes to them, walking on the sea,  wanted to passed by them.
Mark. But they, when they saw him walking on the sea, supposed it to be a ghost,  cried out.
Mark. For they all saw him,  were troubled. And straightaway he spoke with them,  says to them, Cheer up. It is I, fear not.
Mark. And he went up to them into the boat,  the wind ceased. And they were exceedingly amazed in themselves, extraordinarily so. And they wondered,
Mark. for they did not understand about the loaves, for their heart was hardened.
Mark. And having crossed over, they came to the land of Gennesaret,  moored to the shore.
Mark. And when they came out of the boat, straightaway, having recognized him,
Mark. after running around that whole region around, they began to carry about on beds those who were faring badly, where they heard he was there.
Mark. And wherever he entered, into villages or cities or fields, they laid those who were feeble in the marketplaces,  besought him that if they might but touch the hem of his garment. And as many as touched him were being healed.
Mark. And the Pharisees,  some of the scholars, having come from Jerusalem, gathered in to him.
Mark. And having seen some of his disciples eating their loaves with profane hands, that is, unwashed, they accused them.
Mark. (For the Pharisees,  all the Jews, unless they wash their hands carefully, do not eat, holding the tradition of the elders.
Mark. And coming from the marketplace, they do not eat unless they bathe. And there are many other things that they have taken in to retain: washings of cups,  pots,  brazen vessels,  beds.)
Mark. Then the Pharisees and the scholars demand of him, Why do thy disciples not walk according to the tradition of the elders,  eat their bread with unwashed hands?
Mark. And having answered, he said to them, Well did Isaiah prophesy about you hypocrites, as it is written, This people honors me with their lips,  their heart is far distant from me.
Mark. But in vain they worship me, teaching as doctrines the commandments of men.
Mark. For having set aside the commandment of God, ye hold the tradition of men: washings of pots and cups and many other such like things ye do.
Mark. And he said to them, Well do ye reject the commandment of God, so that ye may keep your tradition.
Mark. For Moses said, Honor thy father and thy mother, , He who speaks evil of father or mother, let him perish in death.
Mark. But ye say, If a man should say to his father or mother, Whatever ye might be benefited from me is Corban, that is, an offering,
Mark. then ye no longer allow him to do anything for his father or his mother,
Mark. annulling the word of God by your tradition that ye have delivered. And many such like things ye do.
Mark. And having summoned all the people, he said to them, Hear me all of you,  understand.
Mark. There is nothing outside the man, entering into him that can defile him,  the things coming out of him those are the things that defile the man.
Mark. If any man has ears to hear, let him hear.
Mark. And when he entered into a house from the crowd, his disciples questioned him about the parable.
Mark. And he says to them, Are also ye so without understanding? Do ye not perceive that everything outside that enters into the man cannot defile him,
Mark. because it does not enter into his heart,  into the belly,  goes out into the toilet (making all foods clean)?
Mark. And he said, That which comes out of the man, that defiles the man.
Mark. For from inside the heart of men proceed evil thoughts, adulteries, fornications, murders, thefts,
Mark. covetings, wickednesses, deceit, licentiousness, an evil eye, reviling, pride, foolishness.
Mark. All these evil things come from inside,  defile the man.
Mark. And having risen from there, he went away into the borders of Tyre and Sidon. And having entered into a house, he wanted no man to know it,  yet he could not be hid.
Mark. For a woman whose little daughter had an unclean spirit, after hearing about him, having come, she fell down at his feet.
Mark. Now the woman was a Greek, a Syrophoenician by race. And she besought him that he would cast out the demon from her daughter.
Mark. And Jesus said to her, Allow the children first be filled, for it is not right to take the children's bread and cast it to the house dogs.
Mark. But she answered and says to him, Yes, Lord, for even the house dogs under the table eat of the children's crumbs.
Mark. And he said to her, Because of this saying, go thou. The demon has gone out of thy daughter.
Mark. And having departed to her house, she found the demon having gone out,  her daughter laid upon the bed.
Mark. And again having departed from the borders of Tyre and Sidon, he came to the sea of Galilee in the midst of the regions of Decapolis.
Mark. And they bring a deaf, tongue-tied man to him,  they beseech him to lay his hand upon him.
Mark. And having taken him from the multitude in private, he put his fingers into his ears,  having spat, he touched his tongue.
Mark. And having looked up to heaven, he sighed,  says to him, Ephphatha, that is, Be opened.
Mark. And straightaway his ears were opened,  the bond of his tongue was loosened,  he spoke plainly.
Mark. And he commanded them that they should tell no man,  as much as he commanded them, so much the more abundantly they proclaimed it.
Mark. And they were exceedingly astonished, saying, He has done all things well. He even makes the deaf to hear,  the mute to speak.
Mark. In those days, the multitude being very great,  not having what they might eat, Jesus having summoned his disciples, he says to them,
Mark. I feel compassion toward the multitude, because they continue with me now three days,  do not have what they might eat.
Mark. And if I send them away without food to their house, they will faint on the way, for some of them come from afar.
Mark. And his disciples answered him, From where will anyone be able to fill these men of loaves here in a desolate place?
Mark. And he questioned them, How many loaves have ye? And they said, Seven.
Mark. And he commanded the crowd to sit down on the ground. And after taking the seven loaves, having given thanks, he broke in pieces,  gave to his disciples so that they might place before them. And they place before the crowd.
Mark. And they had a few small fishes. And having blessed them, he said to also place before them.
Mark. And they ate and were filled. And they took up seven hampers of surplus fragments.
Mark. And those who ate were about four thousand,  he sent them away.
Mark. And straightaway having entered into the boat with his disciples, he came into the parts of Dalmanutha.
Mark. And the Pharisees came forth,  began to dispute with him, seeking from him a sign from the sky, testing him.
Mark. And having sighed deeply in his spirit, he says, Why does this generation seek a sign? Truly I am telling you if a sign will be given to this generation.
Mark. And having left them, having entered again into a boat, he departed to the other side.
Mark. And they forgot to take loaves,  they did not have with them in the boat except one loaf.
Mark. And he commanded them, saying, Take heed, watch for the leaven of the Pharisees and the leaven of Herod.
Mark. And they deliberated among each other, saying, We have no loaves.
Mark. And knowing it Jesus says to them, Why do ye deliberate because ye have no loaves? Do ye not yet perceive nor understand? Have ye your heart still hardened?
Mark. Having eyes, ye see not,  having ears, ye hear not? And do ye not remember?
Mark. When I broke the five loaves for the five thousand, how many baskets full of fragments did ye take up? They say to him, Twelve.
Mark. And when the seven for the four thousand, how many hampers full of fragments did ye take up? And they said, Seven.
Mark. And he said to them, How do ye not understand?
Mark. And he comes to Bethsaida,  they bring a blind man to him,  call for him so that he might touch him.
Mark. And having taken the hand of the blind man, he led him outside of the village. And having spat on his eyes, having laid his hands upon him, he questioned him if he sees anything?
Mark. And having looked up, he said, The men that I see, I see as trees walking.
Mark. Then again he put his hands upon his eyes,  made him look up. And he was restored,  saw all men clearly.
Mark. And he sent him away to his house, saying, Thou may neither go into the village, nor may tell any man in the village.
Mark. And Jesus went forth,  his disciples, into the villages of Caesarea Philippi. And on the way he questioned his disciples, saying to them, Who do men say that I am?
Mark. And they answered, saying, John the immerser,  others, Elijah,  others, one of the prophets.
Mark. And he says to them, But who do ye say that I am? And having answered, Peter says to him, Thou are the Christ.
Mark. And he chided them that they should tell no man about him.
Mark. And he began to teach them that it was necessary for the Son of man to suffer many things,  be rejected by the elders,  the chief priests,  the scholars,  be killed,  after three days to rise.
Mark. And he spoke the matter openly. And having taken him aside, Peter began to rebuke him.
Mark. But he, having turned around,  having looked on his disciples, he rebuked Peter, saying, Go thee behind me, Satan, because thou think not the things of God,  the things of men.
Mark. And having called in the multitude with his disciples, he said to them, Whoever wants to follow behind me, let him deny himself,  take up his cross,  follow me.
Mark. For whoever wants to save his life will lose it,  whoever will lose his life because of me and the good news, this man will save it.
Mark. For what will it profit a man if he should gain the whole world,  forfeit his soul?
Mark. Or what will a man give in exchange for his soul?
Mark. For whoever may be ashamed of me and of my words in this adulterous and sinful generation, the Son of man will also be ashamed of him when he comes in the glory of his Father with the holy agents.
Mark. And he said to them, Truly I say to you, there are some of those who have stood here, who will, no, not taste of death until they see the kingdom of God come in power.
Mark. And after six days Jesus takes Peter and James and John,  leads them up onto a high mountain alone, in private. And he was transfigured before them,
Mark. and his garments became glistening, exceedingly white, as snow, such as no fuller on earth is able to whiten.
Mark. And Elijah with Moses appeared to them,  they were talking with Jesus.
Mark. And having responded, Peter says to Jesus, Rabbi, it is good for us to be here. And we could make three tabernacles: one for thee,  one for Moses,  one for Elijah.
Mark. For he knew not what he would say, for they were frightened.
Mark. And a cloud developed overshadowing them. And a voice came out of the cloud, This is my beloved Son. Hear ye him.
Mark. And suddenly having looked around, they saw no man anymore,  only Jesus with themselves.
Mark. And as they were coming down from the mountain, he commanded them that they should tell no man what they saw, except when the Son of man will rise from the dead.
Mark. And they kept the saying to themselves, discussing what is the rising from the dead.
Mark. And they questioned him, saying, The scholars say that Elijah must first come.
Mark. And having answered, he said to them, Elijah indeed comes first and restores all. And how it is written for the Son of man, that he would suffer many things and be rejected.
Mark. But I say to you, that Elijah has also come,  they did to him as much as they wanted, just as it is written for him.
Mark. And when they came to the disciples he saw a great multitude around them,  scholars disputing with them.
Mark. And straightaway all the multitude, having noticed him, were startled. And running near they greeted him.
Mark. And he questioned the scholars, What are ye disputing with them?
Mark. And having answered, one from the multitude said, Teacher, I brought my son to thee, who has a mute spirit.
Mark. And wherever it seizes him, it tears him,  he foams,  gnashes his teeth,  becomes limp. And I spoke to thy disciples that they might cast it out,  they were not able.
Mark. And having answered him, he says, O faithless generation, how long will I be with you? How long will I endure you? Bring him to me.
Mark. And they brought him to him. And when he saw him, straightaway the spirit convulsed him. And having fallen on the ground, he wallowed, foaming.
Mark. And he questioned his father, How much time is it since this has happened to him? And he said, From childhood.
Mark. And it often casts him both into the fire and into the waters so that it might destroy him. But if thou can do anything, help us, having compassion toward us.
Mark. And Jesus said to him, If thou are able to believe, all things are possible to him who believes.
Mark. And straightaway the father of the child having cried out, he said with tears, I believe. Lord, help thou my unbelief.
Mark. And when Jesus saw that a crowd was running together, he rebuked the unclean spirit, saying to it, Thou mute and deaf spirit, I command thee to come out of him,  enter into him no more.
Mark. And having cried out,  having convulsed him much, it came out. And he became as if dead, so as for many to say that he was dead.
Mark. But having taken him by the hand, Jesus lifted him up,  he arose.
Mark. And when he came into the house, his disciples questioned him privately, We were not able to cast it out.
Mark. And he said to them, This kind can come out by nothing, except by prayer and fasting.
Mark. And having departed from there, they passed through Galilee,  he did not want that any man would know it.
Mark. For he taught his disciples,  said to them, The Son of man is delivered up into the hands of men,  they will kill him. And after being killed, he will rise the third day.
Mark. But they did not understand the saying,  were afraid to question him.
Mark. And he came to Capernaum. And having become in the house he questioned them, What were ye deliberating among yourselves on the way?
Mark. But they were silent, for on the way they discussed among each other, who is greater.
Mark. And having sat down, he called the twelve,  he says to them, If any man wants to be first, he will be last of all,  helper of all.
Mark. And having taken a child, he set it in the midst of them. And after embracing it, he said to them,
Mark. Whoever may receive one of such children in my name, receives me,  whoever may receive me, does not receive me,  him who sent me.
Mark. And John answered him, saying, Teacher, we saw a certain man, who does not follow us, casting out demons in thy name,  we forbade him, because he does not follow us.
Mark. But Jesus said, Forbid him not, for there is no man who will do a mighty work in my name,  will be able quickly to speak evil of me.
Mark. For he who is not against you is for you.
Mark. For whoever may give you a cup of water to drink in my name, because ye are of Christ, truly I say to you, he will, no, not lose his reward.
Mark. And whoever may cause one of these little ones who believe in me to stumble, it is good for him instead, if a millstone were hanged about his neck,  he were cast into the sea.
Mark. And if thy hand may cause thee to stumble, cut it off. It is good for thee to enter into life maimed, than having thy two hands to go into hell, into the unquenchable fire,
Mark. where their worm does not perish,  the fire is not quenched.
Mark. And if thy foot may cause thee to stumble, cut it off. It is good for thee to enter into life crippled, than having thy two feet to be cast into hell, into the unquenchable fire
Mark. where their worm does not perish,  the fire is not quenched.
Mark. And if thine eye may cause thee to stumble, pluck it out. It is good for thee to enter into the kingdom of God one-eyed, rather than having two eyes to be cast into the hell of fire,
Mark. where their worm does not perish,  the fire is not quenched.
Mark. For every man will be salted with fire,  every sacrifice will be salted with salt material.
Mark. The salt material is good,  if the salt material becomes saltless, by what will ye season it? Have salt in yourselves,  be at peace among each other.
Mark. And having risen from there, he comes into the borders of Judea through the other side of the Jordan. And multitudes come together to him again, , as he has practiced, he taught them again.
Mark. And the Pharisees having approached, they demanded of him if it is permitted for a man to divorce a wife, testing him.
Mark. And having answered, he said to them, What did Moses command you?
Mark. And they said, Moses permitted to write a document of divorce,  to divorce her.
Mark. But having answered, Jesus said to them, For your hard heart he wrote for you this commandment.
Mark. But from the beginning of creation God made them male and female.
Mark. Because of this a man will leave his father and mother behind,  will be bonded with his wife,
Mark. and the two will be in one flesh. So then they are no more two,  one flesh.
Mark. What therefore God has joined together, no man shall separate.
Mark. And in the house the disciples questioned him again about the same thing.
Mark. And he says to them, Whoever may divorce his wife,  will marry another, commits adultery against her.
Mark. And if a woman should divorce her husband,  will be married to another, she commits adultery.
Mark. And they brought children to him, so that he would touch them. And the disciples rebuked those who were bringing them.
Mark. But when Jesus saw it, he was displeased,  said to them, Allow the children to come to me. Forbid them not, for of such is the kingdom of God.
Mark. Truly I say to you, whoever will not receive the kingdom of God as a child, he will, no, not enter it.
Mark. And having embraced them, while laying his hands upon them, he blessed them.
Mark. And as he was going forth on the way, one man having ran to him,  having knelt to him, questioned him, Good teacher, what should I do that I may inherit eternal life?
Mark. And Jesus said to him, Why do thou call me good? None is good except one, God.
Mark. Thou know the commandments. Thou shall not commit adultery. Thou shall not murder. Thou shall not steal. Thou shall not testify falsely. Thou shall not defraud. Thou shall honor thy father and mother.
Mark. And having answered, he said to him, Teacher, all these things I have observed from my youth.
Mark. And having looked at him, Jesus loved him,  said to him, One thing thou lack. Go thou, sell as many things as thou have,  give to the poor,  thou will have treasure in heaven. And after taking up the cross, come, follow me.
Mark. But having become somber at the saying, he went away sorrowing, for he was a man who has many possessions.
Mark. And Jesus having looked around, he says to his disciples, How difficultly those who have riches will enter into the kingdom of God.
Mark. And the disciples were astonished at his words. But again having answered, Jesus says to them, Children, how difficult it is for those who trust in riches to enter into the kingdom of God.
Mark. It is easier for a camel to go through the hole of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.
Mark. And they were exceedingly astonished, saying among themselves, Then who can be saved?
Mark. And having looked at them, Jesus says, With men, impossible,  not with God. For with God all things are possible.
Mark. Peter began to say to him, Lo, we have left all,  have followed thee.
Mark. And having answered, Jesus said, Truly I say to you, there is no man who has left house, or brothers, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, because of me,  because of the good news,
Mark. but he will receive a hundredfold now in this time, houses,  brothers,  sisters,  mothers,  children,  lands-with persecutions-and in the coming age, eternal life.
Mark. But many first will be last,  the last first.
Mark. And they were on the road going up to Jerusalem,  Jesus was going ahead of them. And they were amazed,  those who followed were afraid. And again having summoned the twelve, he began to tell them the things that were going to happen to him.
Mark. Behold, we go up to Jerusalem. And the Son of man will be delivered to the chief priests and the scholars. And they will condemn him to death,  will deliver him to the Gentiles.
Mark. And they will mock him,  will scourge,  will spit upon him,  will kill him. And the third day he will rise.
Mark. And James and John, the sons of Zebedee, come to him, saying, Teacher, we wish that thou would do for us whatever we ask.
Mark. And he said to them, What do ye want me to do for you?
Mark. And they said to him, Grant to us that we may sit, one at thy right hand,  one at thy left hand, in thy glory.
Mark. But Jesus said to them, Ye know not what ye are asking. Are ye able to drink the cup that I drink? And to be immersed the immersion that I am immersed?
Mark. And they said to him, We are able. And Jesus said to them, Ye will indeed drink the cup that I drink,  the immersion that I am immersed ye will be immersed.
Mark. But to sit at my right hand or at my left hand is not mine to give,  for whom it has been prepared.
Mark. And when the ten heard it they began to indignant about James and John.
Mark. And having summoned them, Jesus says to them, Ye know that those who presume to rule over the Gentiles, lord over them,  their great men have power over them.
Mark. But it is not so among you. Instead, whoever may want to become great among you, will be your helper,
Mark. and whoever of you may want to become first, will be a bondman of all.
Mark. For the Son of man also came not to be served,  to serve,  to give his life a ransom for many.
Mark. And they come to Jericho. And as he went out from Jericho,  his disciples and a considerable crowd, Bartimaeus, the blind son of Timaeus, was sitting by the road begging.
Mark. And when he heard that it was Jesus the Nazarene, he began to cry out and say, Jesus, thou son of David, be merciful to me.
Mark. And many rebuked him, that he would be quiet,  he cried out much more, Thou son of David, be merciful to me.
Mark. And having stood still, Jesus said for him to be called. And they call the blind man, saying to him, Cheer up. Arise, he calls thee.
Mark. And he, having thrown off his garment, having risen, came to Jesus.
Mark. And having answered, Jesus says to him, What do thou want I would do to thee? And the blind man said to him, Rabboni, that I may receive my sight.
Mark. And Jesus said to him, Go thou, thy faith has healed thee. And straightaway he received his sight,  followed him on the way.
Mark. And when they came near to Jerusalem, to Bethphage and Bethany, at the mount of Olives, he sends forth two of his disciples,
Mark. and says to them, Go ye into the village opposite you,  straightaway as ye enter into it, ye will find a colt tied, on which none of men have ever sat. After untying it, bring it.
Mark. And if any man should say to you, Why are ye doing this? say ye, The Lord has need of it,  straightaway he sends it here.
Mark. And they departed,  found the colt tied by the door outside in the street,  they untied it.
Mark. And some of those who stood there said to them, What are ye doing, untying the colt?
Mark. And they said to them just as Jesus commanded,  they allowed them.
Mark. And they brought the colt to Jesus,  threw their garments on it,  he sat upon it.
Mark. And many spread their garments upon the road,  others were cutting branches from the fields,  were spreading on the road.
Mark. And those who went in front,  those who came behind, cried out saying, Hosanna! Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord!
Mark. Blessed is the kingdom of our father David that comes in the name of the Lord! Hosanna in the highest!
Mark. And Jesus entered into Jerusalem,  into the temple. And when he looked around on all things, the hour now being evening, he went out to Bethany with the twelve.
Mark. And on the morrow when they came out from Bethany he was hungry.
Mark. And having seen a fig tree afar off having leaves, he came, if perhaps he will find anything on it. And when he came to it he found nothing except leaves, for it was not the time of figs.
Mark. And having responded, Jesus said to it, No man may eat fruit from thee, no more into the age. And his disciples heard it.
Mark. And they come to Jerusalem. And having entered into the temple, Jesus began to drive out those who sold and bought in the temple. And he overturned the tables of the moneychangers,  the seats of those who sold the doves.
Mark. And he did not permit that any man might carry a container through the temple.
Mark. And he taught, saying to them, Is it not written, My house will be called a house of prayer for all the nations? But ye made it a den of robbers.
Mark. And the scholars and the chief priests heard it,  sought how they might destroy him, for they feared him, because all the people were awed at his doctrine.
Mark. And when it became evening he went forth outside of the city.
Mark. And passing by in the morning, they saw the fig tree dried out from the roots.
Mark. And having remembered, Peter says to him, Rabbi, behold, the fig tree that thou cursed has been dried out.
Mark. And having answered, Jesus says to them, Have faith in God.
Mark. For truly I say to you, that whoever may say to this mountain, Be thou taken up and cast into the sea,  will not doubt in his heart,  will believe that what he says comes to pass, whatever he may say will be for him.
Mark. Because of this I say to you, all things, as many as ye may ask, praying, believe that ye receive,  it will be for you.
Mark. And whenever ye may stand praying, forgive, if ye have anything against any man, so that also your Father in the heavens will forgive you your trespasses.
Mark. But if ye do not forgive, neither will your Father in the heavens forgive your trespasses.
Mark. And they come again to Jerusalem. And as he was walking in the temple, the chief priests,  the scholars,  the elders come to him.
Mark. And they say to him, By what authority are thou doing these things? Or who gave thee this authority so that thou may do these things?
Mark. And having answering, Jesus said to them, I also will question you one word,  answer me,  I will tell you by what authority I do these things.
Mark. The immersion of John, was it from heaven, or from men? Answer me.
Mark. And they reasoned with themselves, saying, If we should say, From heaven, he will say, Why then did ye not believe him?
Mark. But should we say, From men? (They feared the people, for all held John that he was indeed a prophet.)
Mark. And having answered, they say to Jesus, We do not know. And having answering, Jesus says to them, Neither do I tell you by what authority I do these things.
Mark. And he began to speak to them in parables. A man planted a vineyard,  set up a hedge,  dug a wine vat,  built a tower,  leased it to farmers,  went on a journey.
Mark. And at the season he sent forth a bondman to the farmers, so that he might receive by the farmers from the fruit of the vineyard.
Mark. And having seized him, they beat him,  sent him away empty.
Mark. And again he sent another bondman to them. And that man, having stoned, they wounded in the head,  sent him away shamefully treated.
Mark. And again he sent another,  that man they killed,  many others, beating some,  killing some.
Mark. Therefore, still having his one beloved son, he also sent him to them, last, saying, They will be made ashamed by my son.
Mark. But those farmers said among themselves, This is the heir. Come, let us kill him,  the inheritance will be ours.
Mark. And having taken him, they killed him,  cast him outside of the vineyard.
Mark. What therefore will the lord of the vineyard do? He will come and destroy the farmers,  will give the vineyard to others.
Mark. And have ye not read this scripture: The stone that those who build rejected, this came to be into the head of the corner.
Mark. This happened from the Lord,  it is marvelous in our eyes?
Mark. And they sought to seize him. And they feared the multitude, for they knew that he spoke the parable against them. And having left him, they went away.
Mark. And they send some of the Pharisees and of the Herodians to him, so that they might catch him in talk.
Mark. And when they came, they say to him, Teacher, we have seen that thou are true,  it is not a care to thee about any man, for thou look not to a personage of men,  teach the way of God in truth. Is it permitted to give tribute to Caesar or not?
Mark. Should we give, or should we not give? But Jesus, knowing their hypocrisy, said to them, Why do ye test me? Bring me a denarius, so that I may see it.
Mark. And they brought it. And he says to them, Whose is this image and inscription? And they said to him, Caesar's.
Mark. And having answered, Jesus said to them, Render the things of Caesar to Caesar,  the things of God to God. And they marveled at him.
Mark. And Sadducees come to him, who say there is no resurrection. And they questioned him, saying,
Mark. Teacher, Moses wrote to us, If a man's brother dies,  leaves behind a wife,  leaves no child, that his brother should take his wife,  raise up seed for his brother.
Mark. There were seven brothers. And the first took a wife,  dying left no seed.
Mark. And the second took her,  died, neither did he leave seed behind,  the third likewise.
Mark. And the seven took her,  left no seed. Last of all the woman also died.
Mark. In the resurrection when they rise, whose wife will she be of them? For the seven had her as wife.
Mark. And having answered, Jesus said to them, Are ye not led astray because of this: not knowing the scriptures nor the power of God?
Mark. For when they rise from the dead, they neither marry, nor are given in marriage,  are as agents in the heavens.
Mark. But about the dead, that they rise, have ye not read in the book of Moses, how God spoke to him at the bush, saying, I am the God of Abraham,  the God of Isaac,  the God of Jacob?
Mark. He is not the God of the dead,  God of the living. Ye therefore are much misled.
Mark. And one of the scholars having come, having heard them disputing, knowing that he had answered them well, he questioned him, Which is the first commandment of all?
Mark. And Jesus answered him, The first of all the commandments is, Hear, thou Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord,
Mark. and thou shall love the Lord thy God from thy whole heart,  from thy whole soul,  from thy whole mind,  from thy whole strength. This is the first commandment.
Mark. And this second is similar, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself. There is no other commandment greater than these.
Mark. And the scholar said to him, Well, teacher. Thou spoke in truth that he is one,  there is no other but he.
Mark. And to love him from the whole heart,  from the whole understanding,  from the whole soul,  from the whole strength,  to love his neighbor as himself, is more than all whole burnt offerings and sacrifices.
Mark. And when Jesus saw him, that he answered wisely, he said to him, Thou are not far from the kingdom of God. And no man dared to question him any more.
Mark. And having responded as he taught in the temple, Jesus said, How do the scholars say that the Christ is the son of David?
Mark. For David himself said by the Holy Spirit, The Lord says to my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand until I may place thine enemies a footstool of thy feet.
Mark. David himself therefore calls him Lord,  in what way is he his son? And the great multitude heard him gladly.
Mark. And in his teaching he said to them, Look away from the scholars, those who desire to go about in long robes,  salutations in the marketplaces,
Mark. and chief seats in the synagogues,  places of honor at the feasts,
Mark. those who devour widows' houses,  praying long in pretence. These will receive greater condemnation.
Mark. And having sat down opposite the treasury, Jesus watched how the multitude cast money into the treasury,  many rich men cast in much.
Mark. And one poor widow having come, she cast in two mites, which are a quadrans.
Mark. And having summoned his disciples, he says to them, Truly I say to you, that this poor widow cast in more than all those who are casting into the treasury.
Mark. For they all cast in from that which is abundant to them,  she from her need cast in all, as many things she had, her whole living.
Mark. And as he went forth out of the temple, one of his disciples says to him, Teacher, see what kind of stones and what kind of buildings.
Mark. And Jesus having answered, he said to him, See thou these great buildings? There will be left, no, not a stone upon a stone, that will, no, not be brought down.
Mark. And as he sat upon the mount of Olives opposite the temple, Peter and James and John and Andrew questioned him privately,
Mark. Tell us, when will these things be? And what is the sign when all these things are going to be fulfilled?
Mark. And having answered them, Jesus began to say to them, Watch that not any man lead you astray.
Mark. For many will come in my name, saying, I am,  they will lead many astray.
Mark. And when ye may hear of wars and rumors of wars, be not alarmed, for it must happen,  the end is not yet.
Mark. For nation will rise against nation,  kingdom against kingdom,  there will be earthquakes in various places,  there will be famines and troubles. These things are the beginnings of travails.
Mark. But watch ye yourselves, for they will deliver you up to councils,  ye will be beaten in synagogues. And ye will be stood before rulers and kings because of me, for a testimony to them.
Mark. And the good news must first be preached to all the nations.
Mark. But when they lead you, delivering you up, be not anxious before what ye might speak, nor meditate. But whatever may be given you in that hour, speak ye this, for ye are not who speak,  the Holy Spirit.
Mark. And brother will betray brother to death,  a father a child. And children will rise up against parents,  will condemn them to death.
Mark. And ye will be hated by all men because of my name,  he who endures to the end, this man will be saved.
Mark. But when ye see the abomination of desolation, which was spoken by Daniel the prophet, standing where it ought not (let him who reads understand), then let those in Judea flee to the mountains,
Mark. and let the man on the housetop not go down into the house, nor enter in to take anything out of his house,
Mark. and let the man who is in the field not turn back for the things behind, to take his cloak.
Mark. But woe to those who have in the womb,  to those who suckle in those days.
Mark. And pray ye that your flight may not be in winter.
Mark. For those days will be tribulation, such as has not happened from the beginning of the creation that God created until now,  no, will not happen.
Mark. And unless the Lord cut short the days, no flesh would have been saved,  because of the chosen, whom he chose, he cut short the days.
Mark. And then if any man should say to you, Lo, here is the Christ, or, Lo, there, do not believe.
Mark. For false Christs and false prophets will arise,  will give signs and wonders, in order to lead astray, if possible, even the chosen.
Mark. But watch ye. Behold, I have foretold all to you.
Mark. But in those days, after that tribulation, the sun will be darkened,  the moon will not give its light,
Mark. and the stars of the sky will be falling,  the powers that are in the heavens will be shaken.
Mark. And then they will see the Son of man coming in clouds with much power and glory.
Mark. And then he will send forth his agents,  will gather together his chosen from the four winds, from the outermost part of the earth as far as the outermost part of heaven.
Mark. But learn a parable from the fig tree. When its branch now becomes tender,  sprouts the leaves, ye know that summer is near.
Mark. So ye also, when ye may see these things happening, know ye that it is near, at the doors.
Mark. Truly I say to you, that this generation will, no, not pass away, until all these things happen.
Mark. The sky and the earth will pass away,  my words may, no, not pass away.
Mark. But about that day or that hour no man knows, not even the agents in heaven, nor the Son,  the Father.
Mark. Watch ye! Be alert and pray, for ye know not when the time is,
Mark. like a man abroad, having left his house,  having given authority to his bondmen,  to each man his work,  commanded the doorkeeper that he should watch.
Mark. Watch therefore, for ye know not when the lord of the house comes, at evening, or at midnight, or at cock crowing, or in the morning,
Mark. lest having come suddenly, he may find you sleeping.
Mark. And what I say to you I say to all, watch!
Mark. Now after two days was the Passover and the unleavened bread. And the chief priests and the scholars sought how, having take him with trickery, they might kill him,
Mark. but they said, Not during the feast, lest there will be an uproar of the people.
Mark. And while he was in Bethany in the house of Simon the leper, as he sat relaxing, a woman came having an alabaster cruse of ointment of pure spikenard, very valuable. And having broken the alabaster cruse, she poured it on his head.
Mark. And some were indignant within themselves, saying, Why has this waste of the ointment happened?
Mark. For this could have been sold for over three hundred denarii,  given to the poor. And they grumbled at her.
Mark. But Jesus said, Leave her be. Why do ye cause troubles for her? She performed a good work on me.
Mark. For ye always have the poor with you,  whenever ye may desire ye can do them well,  ye do not always have me.
Mark. She applied what she had to anoint my body. She did it beforehand for the burial.
Mark. And truly I say to you, wherever this good news may be preached in the whole world, also what she did will be told for a memorial of her.
Mark. And Judas Iscariot, one of the twelve, went away to the chief priests, so that he might betray him to them.
Mark. And when they heard it, they were glad,  promised to give him silver. And he sought how he might betray him conveniently.
Mark. And on the first day of unleavened bread, when they killed the Passover, his disciples say to him, Where do thou want, after going, we should prepare that thou may eat the Passover?
Mark. And he sends forth two of his disciples,  says to them, Go into the city,  a man carrying a pitcher of water will meet you. Follow him.
Mark. And wherever he may enter, say ye to the house-ruler, The teacher says, Where is the guest room, where I may eat the Passover with my disciples?
Mark. And he himself will show you a large upper room spread out ready. Prepare ye for us there.
Mark. And his disciples went forth,  came into the city,  found just as he had said to them. And they prepared the Passover.
Mark. And having become evening he comes with the twelve.
Mark. And as they were relaxing and eating, Jesus said, Truly I say to you, that one of you eating with me will betray me.
Mark. They began to be sorrowful,  to say to him one by one, Not I? and another, Not I?
Mark. And having answered, he said to them, It is one of the twelve dipping with me in the dish.
Mark. The Son of man indeed goes as it is written about him,  woe to that man through whom the Son of man is betrayed! It was good for him if that man was not born.
Mark. And as they were eating, Jesus having taken bread, having blessed, he broke in pieces,  gave to them,  said, Take, eat, this is my body.
Mark. And after taking the cup, having expressed thanks, he gave to them,  they all drank from it.
Mark. And he said to them, This is my blood of the new covenant, which is poured out for many.
Mark. Truly I say to you, that I will no more drink of the fruit of the grapevine, until that day when I drink it anew in the kingdom of God.
Mark. And when they sang a hymn, they went out onto the mount of Olives.
Mark. And Jesus says to them, All ye will be caused to stumble by me this night, because it is written, I will strike the shepherd,  the sheep will be scattered.
Mark. But after I am raised up, I will go before you into Galilee.
Mark. But Peter said to him, Even if all will be caused to stumble, yet not I.
Mark. And Jesus says to him, Truly I say to thee, that thou today, in this night, before a cock sounds twice, will deny me thrice.
Mark. But he spoke more extreme, If I must die with thee, I will, no, not deny thee. And they all spoke the same way also.
Mark. And they come to a place the name of which was Gethsemane. And he says to his disciples, Sit ye here until I pray.
Mark. And he takes Peter and James and John with him,  began to be greatly disturbed,  very distressed.
Mark. And he says to them, My soul is deeply grieved, to the point of death. Remain ye here,  watch.
Mark. And having gone forward a little, he fell on the ground,  prayed that, if it were possible, the hour might pass from him.
Mark. And he said, Abba, Father, all things are possible to thee. Remove this cup from me,  not what I want,  what thou want.
Mark. And he comes and finds them sleeping. And he says to Peter, Simon, Do thou sleep? Could thou not watch one hour?
Mark. Watch ye and pray that ye may not enter into temptation. Truly, the spirit is willing,  the flesh is weak.
Mark. And again having departed, he prayed, having said the same statement.
Mark. And having returned, he found them again sleeping, for their eyes were weighed down,  they knew not what they should reply to him.
Mark. And he comes the third time,  says to them, Sleep the remaining,  take your rest. It is enough. The hour has come. Behold, the Son of man is betrayed into the hands of sinners.
Mark. Arise, let us be going. Behold, he who betrays me has come near.
Mark. And straightaway, while he still spoke, Judas, being one of the twelve, comes,  with him a great multitude with swords and clubs from the chief priests,  the scholars,  the elders.
Mark. Now he who betrayed him had given them a sign, saying, Whomever I may kiss is he. Seize him,  lead away securely.
Mark. And when he came, straightaway having approached him, he says, Rabbi, Rabbi,  kissed him much.
Mark. And they threw their hands on him,  seized him.
Mark. And a certain one of those who stood by, having drawn his sword, struck the bondman of the high priest,  cut off his ear.
Mark. And having answered, Jesus said to them, Have ye come out as against a robber with swords and clubs to arrest me?
Mark. I was daily near you, teaching in the temple,  ye did not seize me-but that the scriptures might be fulfilled.
Mark. And having forsook him, they all fled.
Mark. And a certain one young man followed with him, having been wrapped naked in a linen cloth. And the young men seized him,
Mark. but having left behind the linen cloth, he fled from them naked.
Mark. And they led Jesus away to the high priest. And all the chief priests and the elders and the scholars assemble with him.
Mark. And Peter followed him from a distance, as far as inside the courtyard of the high priest,  was sitting with the subordinates,  warming himself near the light.
Mark. Now the chief priests and the whole council sought testimony against Jesus in order to put him to death,  did not find it.
Mark. For many testified falsely against him,  their testimonies were not consistent.
Mark. And some men having stood up, testified falsely against him, saying,
Mark. We heard him saying, I will destroy this temple made with hands,  by three days I will build another not made with hands.
Mark. And not even this way was their testimony consistent.
Mark. And the high priest having stood up in the midst, he demanded Jesus, saying, Thou answer nothing? What is it these men testify against thee?
Mark. But he remained silent,  answered nothing. Again the high priest demanded him,  says to him, Are thou the Christ, the Son of the Blessed?
Mark. And Jesus said, I am. And ye will see the Son of man sitting at the right hand of Power,  coming with the clouds of the sky.
Mark. And the high priest having torn his clothes, he says, What further need have we of witnesses?
Mark. Ye have heard the blasphemy. What does it seem to you? And they all condemned him to be deserving of death.
Mark. And some began to spit on him,  to cover his face,  to strike him with a fist,  to say to him, Prophesy. And the subordinates were throwing him with slaps.
Mark. And as Peter was below in the courtyard, one of the servant girls of the high priest comes.
Mark. And having seen Peter warming himself, having looked at him, she says, Thou also were with Jesus of Nazareth.
Mark. But he denied, saying, I know not, nor understand what thou say. And he went outside onto the porch,  a cock sounded.
Mark. And the servant girl having seen him, she began again to say to those who stood by, This man is from them.
Mark. But he again denied it. And after a little while again those who stood by said to Peter, Surely thou are from them, for thou are a Galilean,  thy accent is similar.
Mark. But he began to curse and to swear, I do not know this man of whom ye speak.
Mark. And the second time a cock sounded. And Peter remembered the saying that Jesus said to him, Before a cock sounds twice, thou will deny me thrice. And having broke down, he wept.
Mark. And straightaway in the morning the chief priests with the elders and scholars and the whole council, having made a plan, after binding Jesus, they took him away,  delivered him up to Pilate.
Mark. And Pilate questioned him, Are thou the king of the Jews? And having answered, he said to him, Thou say.
Mark. And the chief priests accused him of many things.
Mark. And Pilate again questioned him, saying, Thou answer nothing? Behold how many things they testify against thee.
Mark. But Jesus answered nothing any more, so as for Pilate to wonder.
Mark. Now during a feast he released to them one prisoner, whomever they requested.
Mark. And a man who was called Barabbas was with the rebels who were bound, men who had committed murder during the insurrection.
Mark. And having cried aloud, the multitude began to ask as he was always doing for them.
Mark. And Pilate answered them, saying, Do ye wish that I would release to you the king of the Jews?
Mark. For he knew that the chief priests had delivered him up because of envy.
Mark. But the chief priests incited the crowd, so that he would release Barabbas to them instead.
Mark. And again having answered, Pilate said to them, What then do ye wish I would do to the man whom ye call the king of the Jews?
Mark. And they cried out again, Crucify him.
Mark. And Pilate said to them, For what evil has he done? But they cried out even more, Crucify him.
Mark. And Pilate, wanting to do what was sufficient for the crowd, released Barabbas to them. And he delivered Jesus, after scourging, so that he might be crucified.
Mark. And the soldiers led him away inside the courtyard, which is the Praetorium,  they call together the whole band.
Mark. And they put purple clothing on him,  clothe him with a woven crown of thorns,
Mark. and began to salute him, Hail, king of the Jews!
Mark. And they struck his head with a reed,  spat upon him,  bowing their knees worshiped him.
Mark. And when they had mocked him, they took the purple garment off of him,  dressed him with his own garments. And they lead him out so that they might crucify him.
Mark. And they draft a certain Simon, a Cyrenian passing by coming from the countryside, the father of Alexander and Rufus, so that he would take his cross.
Mark. And they bring him to the place Golgotha, which is, being interpreted, the place of a skull.
Mark. And they gave him wine mingled with myrrh to drink,  he did not take it.
Mark. And having crucified him, they divided his garments, casting a lot for them, who would take what.
Mark. And it was the third hour,  they crucified him.
Mark. And the inscription of his accusation was inscribed, THE KING OF THE JEWS.
Mark. And they crucify two robbers with him, one at his right hand,  one at his left.
Mark. And the scripture was fulfilled, which says, And he was reckoned with lawless men.
Mark. And those who passed by railed at him, wagging their heads,  saying, Ha! Thou who destroy the temple,  build it in three days,
Mark. save thyself,  come down from the cross.
Mark. Likewise also the chief priests mocking among each other with the scholars said, He saved others, he cannot save himself.
Mark. Let the Christ, the king of Israel, come down now from the cross, that we may see and believe in him. And those who were crucified with him reviled him.
Mark. And having become the sixth hour, darkness occurred over the whole land until the ninth hour.
Mark. And at the ninth hour Jesus cried out in a great voice, saying, Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani? which is, being interpreted, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
Mark. And some of those who stood by, when they heard it, said, Behold, he calls Elijah.
Mark. And one having ran,  having filled a sponge of vinegar,  having placed it on a reed, gave him to drink, saying, Leave be. We might see if Elijah comes to take him down.
Mark. And having given out a great voice, Jesus expired.
Mark. And the curtain of the temple was torn in two from the top to the bottom.
Mark. And when the centurion, who stood from opposite him, saw that he expired, having cried out this way, he said, Truly this man was the Son of God.
Mark. And there were also women looking on from a distance, among whom were also Mary Magdalene,  Mary the mother of James the small man,  of Joses,  Salome;
Mark. women who also followed him and served him when he was in Galilee, also many other women who came up with him to Jerusalem.
Mark. And now having become evening, since it was the Preparation, that is, pre-sabbath,
Mark. Joseph of Arimathaea came, an honorable councilman who also himself was awaiting the kingdom of God, emboldened, he went in near Pilate,  requested the body of Jesus.
Mark. And Pilate wondered if he died already. And having summoned the centurion, he questioned him if he was already dead.
Mark. And having ascertained from the centurion, he granted the body to Joseph.
Mark. And having bought fine linen,  having taken him down, he wrapped him in the linen,  laid him in a sepulcher, being that which had been hewn out of rock. And he rolled a stone to the door of the sepulcher.
Mark. And Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother of Joses saw where he was laid.
Mark. And when the sabbath was past, Mary Magdalene,  Mary the mother of James,  Salome, bought spices, so that having come, they might anoint him.
Mark. And very much early morning on the first day of the week, they come near to the sepulcher when the sun was risen.
Mark. And they said to themselves, Who will roll away the stone for us from the door of the sepulcher?
Mark. And having looked, they see that the stone has been rolled back, for it was very large.
Mark. And having entered into the sepulcher, they saw a young man sitting on the right side, clothed in a white robe,  they were alarmed.
Mark. And he says to them, Be not alarmed. Ye seek Jesus, the man of Nazareth who was crucified. He was raised. He is not here. Behold, the place where they laid him.
Mark. But go, tell his disciples and Peter, that he goes before you into Galilee. Ye will see him there, just as he said to you.
Mark. And having come out, they fled from the sepulcher,  trembling and astonishment seized them. And they said nothing to any man, for they were afraid.
Mark. Now having risen early morning on the first day of the week, he appeared first to Mary Magdalene, from whom he had cast out seven demons.
Mark. That woman, having gone, informed those who became with him, as they mourned and wept.
Mark. And those men, when they heard that he is alive,  was seen by her, did not believe.
Mark. And after these things he appeared in a different form to two of them as they walked going into the countryside.
Mark. And those men having departed, they reported to the others. Neither did they believe those men.
Mark. Afterward he became visible to them, to the eleven, who were relaxing. And he upbraided their unbelief and hard heart, because they did not believe those who saw him after he was raised.
Mark. And he said to them, Having gone into all the world, preach ye the good news to the whole creation.
Mark. He who believes and is immersed will be saved,  he who does not believe will be damned.
Mark. And these signs will accompany those who believe: In my name they will cast out demons. They will speak in new tongues.
Mark. They will take up serpents,  if they drink anything deadly, it will, no, not harm them. They will lay hands on the feeble,  they will fare well.
Mark. Therefore indeed, the Lord, after he spoke to them, was taken up into heaven,  sat down at the right hand of God.
Mark. And those men, having gone forth, they preached everywhere, the Lord working jointly,  confirming the word by the signs that followed. Truly.
Luke
Luke. Inasmuch as many have taken in hand to arrange in order a narration about the deeds that have been brought to fullness among us,
Luke. just as they delivered them to us, who became from the beginning eyewitnesses and servants of the word,
Luke. it occurred to me also, having followed closely from the beginning all things accurately, to write to thee in order, eminent Theophilus,
Luke. so that thou might know the certainty of the declarations about which thou were instructed.
Luke. It came to pass in the days of Herod, king of Judea, there was a certain priest, named Zacharias, from the division of Abijah,  his wife was from the daughters of Aaron,  her name was Elizabeth.
Luke. And they were both righteous before God, going in all the commandments and righteous things of the Lord blameless.
Luke. And there was no child to them because Elizabeth was barren,  they were both advanced in their days.
Luke. But it came to pass during his service as a priest in the course of his division in the presence of God,
Luke. that, according to the custom of the priesthood, he was chosen by lot to burn incense after entering into the temple of the Lord.
Luke. And the whole multitude of the people were praying outside at the hour of incense.
Luke. And an agent of the Lord became visible to him, standing on the right side of the altar of incense.
Luke. And Zacharias having seen, was shaken,  fear fell upon him.
Luke. But the agent said to him, Fear not, Zacharias, because thy plea was heard,  thy wife Elizabeth will bear a son for thee. And thou shall call his name John.
Luke. And there will be joy and exultation for thee,  many will rejoice at his birth.
Luke. For he will be great in the sight of the Lord,  he should, no, not drink wine and strong drink. And he will be filled of the Holy Spirit, even from his mother's belly.
Luke. And he will turn back many of the sons of Israel to the Lord their God.
Luke. And he will go ahead, in front of him, in the spirit and power of Elijah, to turn back the hearts of fathers toward children,  the disobedient in a mentality of the righteous, to make ready for the Lord a people prepared.
Luke. And Zacharias said to the agent, How will I know this? For I am aged,  my wife is advanced in her days.
Luke. And having answered, the agent said to him, I am Gabriel who stand in the presence of God. And I was sent to speak to thee,  to announce these good news to thee.
Luke. And behold, thou will be mute,  not able to speak until that day these things will come to pass, because thou did not believe my words, which will be fulfilled in their time.
Luke. And the people were waiting for Zacharias,  they wondered during his delay in the temple.
Luke. And when he came out, he could not speak to them,  they recognized that he had seen a vision in the temple. And he was beckoning to them,  remained speechless.
Luke. And it came to pass, when the days of his service were fulfilled, he departed to his house.
Luke. And after these days his wife Elizabeth conceived,  she concealed herself five months, saying,
Luke. Thus the Lord has done to me during the days in which he looked, to take away my shame among men.
Luke. Now in the sixth month the agent Gabriel was sent by God to a city of Galilee, named Nazareth,
Luke. to a virgin betrothed to a man whose name was Joseph, of the house of David. And the virgin's name was Mary.
Luke. And the agent having come in near her, he said, Hail, thou who are highly favored. The Lord is with thee, thou who are blessed among women.
Luke. But having seen, she was perplexed at his saying,  was pondering what kind of greeting this might be.
Luke. And the agent said to her, Fear not, Mary, for thou have found favor with God.
Luke. And behold, thou will conceive in thy womb,  bring forth a son. And thou shall call his name JESUS.
Luke. This man will be great,  will be called the Son of the Most High. And the Lord God will give to him the throne of his father David.
Luke. And he will reign over the house of Jacob into the ages. And of his kingdom there will be no end.
Luke. And Mary said to the agent, How will this be, since I know not a man?
Luke. And having answered, the agent said to her, The Holy Spirit will come upon thee,  the power of the Most High will overshadow thee. Therefore also the holy thing that is begotten will be called the Son of God.
Luke. And behold, Elizabeth thy kinswoman, she also has conceived a son in her old age,  this is the sixth month with her who was called barren.
Luke. For no word from God will be impossible.
Luke. And Mary said, Behold the maid-servant of the Lord. May it happen to me according to thy word. And the agent departed from her.
Luke. And having risen in these days, Mary went with haste into the hill country, into a city of Judah,
Luke. and entered into the house of Zacharias and greeted Elizabeth.
Luke. And it came to pass, when Elizabeth heard the greeting of Mary, the babe leaped in her belly. And Elizabeth was filled of the Holy Spirit,
Luke. and she exclaimed in a great voice,  said, Blessed are thou among women,  blessed is the fruit of thy belly.
Luke. And why is this to me, that the mother of my Lord would come to me?
Luke. For lo, when the voice of thy greeting happened in my ears, the babe leaped with joy in my belly.
Luke. And blessed is she who believed, because there will be a fulfillment of the things that were spoken to her from the Lord.
Luke. And Mary said, My soul magnifies the Lord,
Luke. and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior,
Luke. because he has looked upon the lowliness of his bondmaid. For behold, from henceforth all generations will regard me blessed,
Luke. because the Mighty has done great things to me. And his name is holy.
Luke. And his mercy is for generations of generations to those who fear him.
Luke. He did a mighty work by his arm. He scattered the proud in the mentality of their heart.
Luke. He brought down potentates from thrones,  raised up lowly men.
Luke. He filled those who are hungry with good things,  those who are rich he sent away empty.
Luke. He helped his boy Israel to be reminded of mercy,
Luke. just as he spoke to our fathers: to Abraham and his seed into the age.
Luke. And Mary dwelt with her about three months,  returned to her house.
Luke. Now the time for Elizabeth was fulfilled for her to give birth,  she brought forth a son.
Luke. And her neighbors and her kinfolk heard that the Lord magnified his mercy toward her,  they rejoiced with her.
Luke. And it came to pass on the eighth day, that they came to circumcise the child,  they were calling it by the name of his father Zacharias.
Luke. And his mother having answered, said, No,  he will be called John.
Luke. And they said to her, There is no man among thy relatives who is called by this name.
Luke. And they made signs to his father, whatever he wanted to call him.
Luke. And having asked for a writing tablet, he wrote, saying, His name is John. And they all marveled.
Luke. And immediately his mouth was opened,  his tongue,  he spoke, praising God.
Luke. And fear developed in all who dwell around them. And all these sayings were talked about in the entire hill country of Judea.
Luke. And all who heard stored up in their heart, saying, What then will this child be? For the hand of the Lord was with him.
Luke. And his father Zacharias was filled of the Holy Spirit,  prophesied, saying,
Luke. Blessed is the Lord, the God of Israel, because he came to help,  made ransom for his people.
Luke. And he raised up a horn of salvation for us in the house of his boy David,
Luke. just as he spoke by the mouth of his holy prophets from of old,
Luke. salvation from our enemies,  from the hand of all who hate us,
Luke. to do mercy with our fathers,  his holy covenant to be remembered,
Luke. the oath that he swore to Abraham our father, to give to us,
Luke. without fear from the hand of our enemies, having been saved to serve him
Luke. in piety and righteousness before him all the days of our life.
Luke. And thou, child, will be called a prophet of the Most High. For thou will go ahead, before the face of the Lord, to prepare his ways,
Luke. to give knowledge of salvation to his people in the remission of their sins,
Luke. because of the bowels of mercy of our God, by which the dayspring from on high came to help us,
Luke. to give light to those who dwell in darkness and the shadow of death, to guide our feet into a way of peace.
Luke. And the child grew,  became strong in spirit. And he was in the desolate regions until the day of his manifestation to Israel.
Luke. Now it came to pass in those days, a decree went out from Caesar Augustus to enroll all the world.
Luke. This enrollment first occurred when Quirinius was governor of Syria.
Luke. And all went to be enrolled, each into his personal city.
Luke. And Joseph also went up from Galilee, out of the city of Nazareth, into Judea to the city of David, which is called Bethlehem, because he was of the house and patriarchy of David,
Luke. to enroll himself with Mary, the woman who was betrothed to him, being pregnant.
Luke. And it came to pass while they were there, the days were fulfilled for her to bring forth.
Luke. And she brought forth her son, the firstborn,  wrapped him in swaddling clothes,  laid him in the feed trough, because there was no place for them in the inn.
Luke. And there were shepherds in the same region living in the fields,  keeping watch by night over their flock.
Luke. And behold, an agent of the Lord stood near them,  the glory of the Lord shone around them. And they feared a great fear.
Luke. And the agent said to them, Fear not, for behold, I bring you good news of great joy that will be to all the people,
Luke. because to you was born today in the city of David a Savior, who is Christ Lord.
Luke. And this is the sign to you: Ye will find a babe wrapped in swaddling clothes,  lying in a feed trough.
Luke. And suddenly there came to be with the agent a multitude of the heavenly host praising God,  saying,
Luke. Glory to God in the highest,  on earth peace, goodwill among men.
Luke. And it came to pass, as the agents went away from them into heaven, that the men (the shepherds) said to each other, Let us indeed go through as far as Bethlehem,  see this declaration that has come to pass, which the Lord made known to us.
Luke. And having hastened, they came and found both Mary and Joseph,  the babe lying in the feed trough.
Luke. And when they saw it, they informed about the declaration that was told them about this child.
Luke. And all who heard it wondered about the things that were spoken to them by the shepherds.
Luke. But Mary kept all these proclamations, pondering in her heart.
Luke. And the shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for all that they heard and saw, as it was told to them.
Luke. And when eight days were fulfilled to circumcise him, that his name was called JESUS, the one called by the agent before he was conceived in the belly.
Luke. And when the days of their purification according to the law of Moses were fulfilled, they brought him up to Jerusalem, to present him to the Lord,
Luke. (just as it is written in a law of the Lord that every male that opens a womb will be called holy to the Lord),
Luke. and to offer a sacrifice according to that which is said in a law of the Lord, a pair of turtledoves, or two young pigeons.
Luke. And behold, there was a man in Jerusalem whose name was Simeon. And this man was righteous and devout, waiting for the encouragement of Israel,  the Holy Spirit was upon him.
Luke. And it was divinely revealed to him by the Holy Spirit, that he would not see death before he would see the Christ of the Lord.
Luke. And he came by the Spirit into the temple. And when the parents brought in the child Jesus, for them to do according to the custom of the law about him,
Luke. he also received it into his arms,  praised God,  said,
Luke. Now dismiss thy bondman in peace, Master, according to thy word,
Luke. because my eyes have seen thy salvation,
Luke. which thou prepared toward the face of all the peoples:
Luke. a light for enlightenment of Gentiles,  glory of thy people Israel.
Luke. And Joseph and his mother were marveling at the things being spoken about him.
Luke. And Simeon blessed them,  said to Mary his mother, Behold, this man is set for the falling and the rising of many in Israel,  for a sign being repudiated
Luke. (and also of thee, a sword will pierce through thine own soul), so that thoughts out of many hearts may be revealed.
Luke. And there was Anna, a prophetess, a daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of Asher (being advanced in many days, having lived with a husband seven years from her virginity,
Luke. and this woman was a widow to eighty-four years), who did not depart from the temple, serving with fastings and supplications night and day.
Luke. And having stood near at that same hour, she acknowledged the Lord,  spoke about him to all those who were awaiting redemption in Jerusalem.
Luke. And when they completed all things according to the law of the Lord, they returned into Galilee to their own city Nazareth.
Luke. And the child grew,  became strong in spirit, filled with wisdom. And the grace of God was upon it.
Luke. And his parents went to Jerusalem every year at the feast of the Passover.
Luke. And when he became twelve years old, them having gone up according to the custom of the feast,
Luke. and having fulfilled the days, during their return the boy Jesus remained behind in Jerusalem. And Joseph and his mother did not know it,
Luke. but, having supposed him to be in the caravan, they went a day's journey. And they sought him among their kinfolk and acquaintances.
Luke. And not having found him, they turned back to Jerusalem, seeking him.
Luke. And it came to pass after three days they found him in the temple, sitting in the midst of the teachers, both hearing them,  questioning them.
Luke. And all who heard him were astonished at his understanding and answers.
Luke. And when they saw him they were amazed. And his mother said to him, Child, why did thou this way to us? Behold, thy father and I were seeking thee sorrowing.
Luke. And he said to them, Why is it that ye were seeking me? Had ye not known that I must be among the things of my Father?
Luke. And they did not understand the saying that he spoke to them.
Luke. And he went down with them,  came to Nazareth,  was being subordinate to them. And his mother kept all these sayings in her heart.
Luke. And Jesus increased in wisdom and in stature,  in favor with God and men.
Luke. Now in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar, Pontius Pilate being governor of Judea,  Herod being tetrarch of Galilee,  his brother Philip being tetrarch of the region belonging to Ituraea,  of the region of Trachonitis,  Lysanias being tetrarch of Abilene,
Luke. in the high priesthood of Annas and Caiaphas, the word of God came to be in John the son of Zacharias in the wilderness.
Luke. And he came into all the region around the Jordan, preaching an immersion of repentance for remission of sins,
Luke. as it is written in the book of the words of Isaiah the prophet, which says, The voice of a man crying out in the wilderness: Prepare ye the way of the Lord. Make his paths straight.
Luke. Every valley will be filled,  every mountain and hill will be brought low. And the crooked things will be into straight and the rough into smooth ways.
Luke. And all flesh will see the salvation of God.
Luke. He said therefore to the multitudes who went out to be immersed by him, Ye offspring of vipers, who showed you to flee from the coming wrath?
Luke. Bring forth therefore fruits worthy of repentance,  do not begin to say within yourselves, We have a father, Abraham. For I say to you, that God is able from these stones to raise up children to Abraham.
Luke. And even now the axe is laid at the root of the trees. Every tree therefore not making good fruit is cut down,  cast into fire.
Luke. And the crowds questioned him, saying, What then shall we do?
Luke. And having answered, he says to them, He who has two coats, let him share with him not having,  he who has food, let him do likewise.
Luke. And tax collectors also came to be immersed,  they said to him, Teacher, what should we do?
Luke. And he said to them, Collect not one thing more than from what has been appointed for you.
Luke. And men who were soldiers also questioned him, saying, And we, what should we do? And he said to them, Do violence to no man, nor accuse falsely,  be content with your wages.
Luke. And as the people were expectant,  all pondering in their hearts about John, if perhaps he was the Christ,
Luke. John responded, saying to them all, I indeed immerse you in water,  a man mightier than I comes, of whom I am not worthy to unloose the strap of his shoes. He will immerse you in the Holy Spirit and fire,
Luke. whose winnowing fork is in his hand,  he will thoroughly cleanse his threshing floor,  will gather the wheat into his storehouse,  the chaff he will burn with unquenchable fire.
Luke. Indeed therefore, also exhorting the people with many other things, he preached the good news.
Luke. But Herod the tetrarch, being reproved by him about Herodias his brother's wife,  about all of which evil things Herod had done,
Luke. also added this to them all, he even locked up John in prison.
Luke. Now it came to pass, during the immersion of all the people, Jesus also having been immersed and praying, for the heaven to be opened,
Luke. and the Holy Spirit to descend in a bodily form as a dove upon him,  a voice to occur out of heaven, saying, Thou are my beloved Son. In thee I am well pleased.
Luke. And Jesus himself was beginning to be about thirty years old, being the son (as was supposed) of Joseph, the son of Heli,
Luke. the son of Matthat, the son of Levi, the son of Melchi, the son of Janna, the son of Joseph,
Luke. the son of Mattathias, the son of Amos, the son of Nahum, the son of Esli, the son of Naggai,
Luke. the son of Maath, the son of Mattathias, the son of Semein, the son of Joseph, the son of Joda,
Luke. the son of Joannan, the son of Rhesa, the son of Zerubbabel, the son of Shealtiel, the son of Neri,
Luke. the son of Melchi, the son of Addi, the son of Cosam, the son of Elmadam, the son of Er,
Luke. the son of Jose, the son of Eliezer, the son of Jorim, the son of Matthat, the son of Levi,
Luke. the son of Simeon, the son of Judah, the son of Joseph, the son of Jonam, the son of Eliakim,
Luke. the son of Melea, the son of Menna, the son of Mattatha, the son of Nathan, the son of David,
Luke. the son of Jesse, the son of Obed, the son of Boaz, the son of Salmon, the son of Nahshon,
Luke. the son of Amminadab, the son of Ram, the son of Hezron, the son of Perez, the son of Judah,
Luke. the son of Jacob, the son of Isaac, the son of Abraham, the son of Terah, the son of Nahor,
Luke. the son of Serug, the son of Reu, the son of Peleg, the son of Heber, the son of Shelah
Luke. the son of Cainan, the son of Arphaxad, the son of Shem, the son of Noah, the son of Lamech,
Luke. the son of Methuselah, the son of Enoch, the son of Jared, the son of Mahalaleel, the son of Cainan,
Luke. the son of Enos, the son of Seth, the son of Adam, the son of God.
Luke. And Jesus, full of the Holy Spirit, returned from the Jordan,  was led by the Spirit into the wilderness,
Luke. being tempted forty days by the devil. And he ate nothing in those days,  when they were ended, afterward he was hungry.
Luke. And the devil said to him, If thou are the Son of God, speak to this stone that it may become bread.
Luke. And Jesus answered, saying to him, It is written, Man will not live on bread alone,  on every saying of God.
Luke. And having brought him onto a high mountain, the devil showed him all the kingdoms of the world in a moment of time.
Luke. And the devil said to him, I will give to thee all this authority,  the glory of them, because it has been delivered to me,  to whomever I want I give it.
Luke. If therefore thou will worship before me, it will all be thine.
Luke. And having answered, Jesus said to him, Go thee behind me, Satan. It is written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God,  him only shall thou serve.
Luke. And he brought him to Jerusalem,  set him on the pinnacle of the temple,  he said to him, If thou are the Son of God, cast thyself down from here,
Luke. for it is written, He will give his agents orders about thee, to protect thee,
Luke. and, They will take thee up on their hands, lest thou dash thy foot against a stone.
Luke. And having answered, Jesus said to him, It is said, Thou shall not challenge the Lord thy God.
Luke. And when the devil ended every temptation, he withdrew from him until a time.
Luke. And Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit into Galilee. And a report went out about him through the entire region around.
Luke. And he taught in their synagogues, being glorified by all.
Luke. And he came to Nazareth, where he was brought up. And according to that which was customary to him, he entered into the synagogue on the sabbath day,  stood up to read.
Luke. And the book of the prophet Isaiah was given to him. And having opened the book, he found the place where it was written,
Luke. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he anointed me to preach good news to the poor. He has sent me to heal the broken hearted, to proclaim deliverance to the captives,  recovering of sight to the blind, to sent forth in deliverance those who have been broken,
Luke. to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord.
Luke. And having closed the book, having given it back to the attendant, he sat down. And the eyes of all in the synagogue were focused on him.
Luke. And he began to say to them, Today this scripture has been fulfilled in your ears.
Luke. And all witnessed to him,  wondered at the words of grace that proceeded out of his mouth. And they said, Is this not the son of Joseph?
Luke. And he said to them, Ye will doubtless say to me this proverb: Physician, heal thyself. How many things we heard that happened at Capernaum, do also here in thy fatherland.
Luke. And he said, Truly I say to you, that not one prophet is acceptable in his fatherland.
Luke. But in truth I say to you, many widows were in Israel in the days of Elijah, when the sky was shut up for three years and six months, when a great famine occurred on all the land.
Luke. And Elijah was sent to none of them, except to Zarephath, to a widow woman of Sidon.
Luke. And many lepers were in Israel near Elisha the prophet,  none of them was cleansed, except Naaman the Syrian.
Luke. And all in the synagogue were filled with rage, having heard these things.
Luke. And having risen up, they thrust him outside of the city,  brought him as far as the brow of the hill on which their city had been built, in order to throw him down headlong.
Luke. But he, having passed through the midst of them, departed.
Luke. And he came down to Capernaum, a city of Galilee. And he was teaching them on the sabbath day,
Luke. and they were astonished at his teaching, for his word was with authority.
Luke. And in the synagogue there was a man who had a spirit of an unclean deity. And it cried out in a great voice, saying,
Luke. Oh no! What is with us and with thee, Jesus of Nazareth? Did thou come to destroy us? I know thee who thou are, the Holy man of God.
Luke. And Jesus rebuked it, saying, Be thou muzzled,  come out of him. And the demon having thrown him down in the midst, it came out of him, not having harm him.
Luke. And amazement developed in all,  they spoke among each other, saying, What is this word? Because with authority and power he commands the unclean spirits,  they come out.
Luke. And a report about him went forth into every place of the region around.
Luke. And having arisen from the synagogue, he entered into the house of Simon. And Simon's mother-in-law was gripped by a great fever,  they besought him about her.
Luke. And having stood over her, he rebuked the fever. And it left her,  immediately after rising up, she served them.
Luke. And when the sun was setting, all, as many as had those who were incapacitated with various diseases, brought them to him. And having laid his hands on each one of them, he healed them.
Luke. And also demons came out from many, crying out,  saying, Thou are the Christ, the Son of God. And rebuking them, he did not allow them to speak, because they knew him to be the Christ.
Luke. And when it became day, having departed, he went to a desolate place. And the multitudes sought him,  they came to him,  were restraining him not depart from them.
Luke. But he said to them, I must preach the good news of the kingdom of God to the other cities also, because I was sent for this.
Luke. And he was preaching in the synagogues of Galilee.
Luke. Now it came to pass, while the multitude pressed upon him to hear the word of God,  having stood still, he was beside the lake of Gennesaret.
Luke. And he saw two boats standing by the lake,  the fishermen having gone out of them, were washing their nets.
Luke. And having entered into one of the boats, which was Simon's, he asked him to put out a little from the land. And having sat down, he taught the crowds from the boat.
Luke. And when he stopped speaking, he said to Simon, Put out into the depth,  let down your nets for a catch.
Luke. And having answered, Simon said to him, Master, having toiled through the whole night, we took nothing,  at thy saying, I will let down the net.
Luke. And having done this, they enclosed a great multitude of fishes,  their net was tearing.
Luke. And they beckoned to their partners in the other boat, after coming, to assist them. And they came and filled both the boats, so as for them to be sunk down.
Luke. But Simon Peter having seen, he fell down at Jesus' knees, saying, Depart from me, because I am a sinful man, Lord.
Luke. For astonishment surrounded him,  all those with him, at the catch of the fishes that they caught,
Luke. and likewise also James and John, sons of Zebedee, who were partners with Simon. And Jesus said to Simon, Fear not, from henceforth thou will be catching men.
Luke. And when they brought their boats to land, after forsaking all, they followed him.
Luke. And it came to pass while he was in one of the cities, behold, a man full of leprosy. And having seen Jesus, having fallen on his face, he besought him, saying, Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean.
Luke. And having stretched forth his hand, he touched him, having said, I will, be thou clean. And straightaway the leprosy departed from him.
Luke. And he commanded him to tell no man, , After going, show thyself to the priest,  bring concerning thy cleansing, just as Moses commanded for a testimony to them.
Luke. But the report about him went through more,  many multitudes came together to hear,  to be healed by him from their infirmities.
Luke. But he himself was withdrawing into the desolate regions,  praying.
Luke. And it came to pass during one of those days, he was also teaching. And there were seated Pharisees and law teachers, who were men having come out of every town of Galilee and Judea and Jerusalem. And the power of the Lord was to heal them.
Luke. And behold, men bringing a man on a bed who was paralyzed. And they sought to bring him in,  to lay him before him.
Luke. And not having found how they might bring him in because of the multitude, after going up upon the housetop, they let him down through the tiles with the small bed into the midst in front of Jesus.
Luke. And having seen their faith, he said to him, Man, thy sins are forgiven thee.
Luke. And the scholars and the Pharisees began to deliberate, saying, Who is this who speaks blasphemies? Who can forgive sins, except God alone?
Luke. But when Jesus perceived their thoughts, having responded, he said to them, Why do ye deliberate in your hearts?
Luke. Which is easier, to say, Thy sins are forgiven thee, or to say, Arise and walk?
Luke. But that ye may know that the Son of man has authority upon earth to forgive sins (he said to the paralyzed man), I say to thee, Arise,  after taking up thy small bed, go to thy house.
Luke. And immediately having risen up before them, after taking up that on which he lay, he departed to his house glorifying God.
Luke. And amazement gripped all,  they glorified God. And they were filled with fear, saying, We have seen strange things today.
Luke. And after these things he went forth and saw a tax collector, named Levi, sitting at the tax office. And he said to him, Follow me.
Luke. And after leaving behind all, having risen up, he followed him.
Luke. And Levi made a great feast for him in his house,  there was a large crowd of tax collectors and others who were relaxing with them.
Luke. And their scholars and Pharisees murmured against his disciples, saying, Why do ye eat and drink with the tax collectors and sinners?
Luke. And having answered, Jesus said to them, Those who are well have no need of a physician,  those faring badly.
Luke. I have not come to call the righteous but sinners to repentance.
Luke. And they said to him, Why do the disciples of John fast often,  make supplications,  likewise those of the Pharisees,  thine eat and drink.
Luke. And he said to them, Ye cannot make the sons of the wedding hall fast while the bridegroom is with them.
Luke. But the days will also come when the bridegroom will be taken away from them, then they will fast in those days.
Luke. And he also spoke a parable to them. No man puts a patch of a new garment on an old garment, otherwise both the new tears,  that from the new will not blend with the old.
Luke. And no man puts new wine into old wineskins, otherwise the new wine will burst the wineskins,  will itself be spilled,  the wineskins will be ruined.
Luke. But new wine must be put into fresh wineskins,  both are preserved together.
Luke. And no man having drunk old straightaway desires new, for he says, The old is better.
Luke. Now it came to pass for him to be going through the grain fields on a particular sabbath,  his disciples were plucking the ears and were eating, rubbing them in their hands.
Luke. But some of the Pharisees said to them, Why do ye what is not permitted to do on the sabbath day?
Luke. And having answered them, Jesus said, Have ye not read even this, what David did when he was hungry,  those who were with him,
Luke. how he entered into the house of God,  took and ate the loaves of the presentation,  also gave to those who were with him, which is not permitted to eat, except the priests alone?
Luke. And he said to them, The Son of man is lord also of the sabbath.
Luke. And it also came to pass on another sabbath for him to enter into the synagogue and teach. And a man was there,  his right hand was withered.
Luke. And the scholars and the Pharisees watched if he would heal on the sabbath, so that they might find an accusation against him.
Luke. But he knew their thoughts,  he said to the man who had the withered hand, Rise up,  stand forth in the midst. And having risen, he stood up.
Luke. Then Jesus said to them, I will question you. What? Is it permitted on the sabbath to do good, or to do harm, to save life, or to kill?
Luke. And having looked around on them all, he said to him, Stretch forth thy hand. And he did,  his hand was restored whole as the other.
Luke. But they were filled with fury,  deliberated with each other what they might do to Jesus.
Luke. And he happened in these days to go out onto the mountain to pray,  he was continuing all night in prayer to God.
Luke. And when it became day, he called his disciples,  chose twelve from them, whom he also named apostles:
Luke. Simon, whom he also named Peter,  Andrew his brother, James and John, Philip and Bartholomew,
Luke. Matthew and Thomas, James the son of Alphaeus,  Simon who was called the Zealot,
Luke. Judas the son of James,  Judas Iscariot who also became a traitor.
Luke. And having come down with them, he stood on a level place. And a company of his disciples,  a large number of the people from all Judea and Jerusalem,  the maritime Tyre and Sidon, were those who came to hear him,  to be healed from their diseases,
Luke. also those who were afflicted with unclean spirits. And they were healed.
Luke. And all the multitude sought to touch him, because power came forth from him,  healed them all.
Luke. And having lifted up his eyes on his disciples, he said, Blessed are the poor, because the kingdom of God is what belongs to you.
Luke. Blessed are those who hunger now, because ye will be filled. Blessed are those who weep now, because ye will laugh.
Luke. Blessed are ye, when men will hate you,  when they will exclude you,  revile you,  cast out your name as evil, because of the Son of man.
Luke. Rejoice ye in that day,  leap, for behold, your reward is great in heaven, for their fathers did in the same way to the prophets.
Luke. However, woe to you the rich, because ye have received your consolation.
Luke. Woe to you who are filled now, because ye will hunger. Woe to you who laugh now, because ye will mourn and weep.
Luke. Woe when men will speak well of you, for their fathers did in the same way to the false prophets.
Luke. But I say to you, to those who hear, love your enemies. Do good to those who hate you.
Luke. Bless those who curse you. Pray for those who mistreat you.
Luke. To him who strikes thee on the cheek offer the other also,  from him who takes away thy cloak, also do not withhold thy coat.
Luke. Give to every man who asks thee,  from him who takes away thy personal things do not demand them back.
Luke. And as ye desire that men would do to you, do ye also to them likewise.
Luke. And if ye love those who love you, what credit is for you? For even sinners love those who love them.
Luke. And if ye do good to those who do good to you, what credit is for you? For even sinners do the same.
Luke. And if ye lend to whom ye hope to receive, what credit is for you? For even sinners lend to sinners, to receive as much again.
Luke. But love your enemies,  do good,  lend, despairing nothing,  your reward will be great. And ye will be sons of the Most High, because he is good toward the ungrateful and bad.
Luke. Become ye therefore merciful, even as your Father is merciful.
Luke. And do not criticize,  ye will, no, not be criticized. And do not condemn,  ye will, no, not be condemned. Forgive,  ye will be forgiven.
Luke. Give,  it will be given to you, good measure, pressed down, shaken together,  running over, they will give into your bosom. For with the same measure with which ye measure, it will be measured again to you.
Luke. And he spoke a parable to them. Can a blind man lead a blind man? Will they not both fall into a ditch?
Luke. A disciple is not above his teacher,  every disciple who is fully developed will be as his teacher.
Luke. And why do thou see the speck in thy brother's eye,  do not perceive the beam in thine own eye?
Luke. Or how can thou say to thy brother, Brother, allow me to take out the speck that is in thine eye, when thou thyself do not see the beam in thine own eye? Thou hypocrite, first take out the beam from thine own eye,  then thou will see clearly to take out the speck in thy brother's eye.
Luke. For a good tree is not producing corrupt fruit, nor a corrupt tree producing good fruit.
Luke. For each tree is known from its own fruit. For they do not gather figs from thorns, nor do they harvest grapes from a bramble bush.
Luke. The good man out of the good treasure of his heart brings forth the good,  the bad man out of the bad treasure of his heart brings forth the bad, for out of the abundance of the heart his mouth speaks.
Luke. And why do ye call me, Lord, Lord,  not do the things that I say?
Luke. Every man who comes to me,  hears my sayings,  does them, I will show you to whom he is like.
Luke. He is like a man who builds a house, who dug and excavated,  laid a foundation upon the rock. And when a flood developed, the stream beat upon that house,  could not shake it, for it had been founded upon the rock.
Luke. But he who heard,  not having done, is like a man who built a house upon the soil without a foundation, on which the stream beat,  straightaway it fell. And the ruin of that house became great.
Luke. And when he completed all his sayings in the ears of the people, he entered into Capernaum.
Luke. And a certain centurion's bondman faring badly was going to perish, who was esteemed by him.
Luke. And having heard about Jesus, he sent elders of the Jews to him who asked him that, having come, he would save his bondman.
Luke. And when they came to Jesus they urged him earnestly, saying, He is worthy for whom thou may offer this,
Luke. for he loves our nation,  he himself built the synagogue for us.
Luke. And Jesus went with them. And when he was now not far distant from the house, the centurion sent friends to him, saying to him, Lord, be not troubled, for I am not worthy that thou should come under my roof.
Luke. Therefore neither did I consider myself worthy to come to thee,  speak by word,  my boy will be healed.
Luke. For I also am a man set under authority, having soldiers under myself. And I say to this man, Go,  he goes,  to another, Come,  he comes,  to my bondman, Do this,  he does.
Luke. And when Jesus heard these things, he marveled him,  having turned around to the multitude who followed him, he said, I say to you, not even in Israel have I found such great faith.
Luke. And those who were sent, having returned to the house, found the bondman who was feeble, being well.
Luke. And it came to pass on the next day that he went to a city called Nain,  a considerable number of his disciples went with him, also a large multitude.
Luke. Now when he came near to the gate of the city, behold, an only begotten son who died was being carried out for his mother. And she was a widow,  a considerable crowd of the city was with her.
Luke. And when the Lord saw her, he felt compassion toward her,  said to her, Weep not.
Luke. And having come, he touched the coffin,  the men carrying it stood still. And he said, Young man, I say to thee, arise.
Luke. And the dead man sat up,  began to speak. And he gave him to his mother.
Luke. And fear seized all. And they glorified God, saying, A great prophet has been raised among us, , God came to help his people.
Luke. And this report about him went forth in the whole of Judea,  in all the region around.
Luke. And the disciples of John informed him about all these things.
Luke. And having summoned a certain two of his disciples, John sent them to Jesus, saying, Are thou he who comes, or do we look for another man?
Luke. And when they came to him, they said, John the immerser has sent us to thee, saying, Are thou he who comes, or do we look for another man?
Luke. And in the same hour he healed many from diseases and plagues and evil spirits. And he granted sight to many blind men.
Luke. And having answered, Jesus said to them, After going, report to John the things that ye saw and heard: the blind see, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed,  the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, the poor are preached good news.
Luke. And blessed is he, whoever will not be offended by me.
Luke. And after John's messengers departed, he began to say to the multitudes about John, What did ye go out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken with the wind?
Luke. But what did ye go out to see? A man clothed in soft raiment? Behold, those in elegant clothing,  existing in luxury, are in kingly places.
Luke. But what did ye go out to see? A prophet? Yea, I say to you,  much more than a prophet.
Luke. This is he about whom it is written, Behold, I send my agent before thy face, who will prepare thy way before thee.
Luke. For I say to you, among men born of women there is not one prophet greater than John the immerser, yet the smaller in the kingdom of God is greater than he.
Luke. And all the people having heard,  the tax collectors who were immersed the immersion of John, justified God.
Luke. But the Pharisees and the lawyers who were not immersed by him, rejected the purpose of God for themselves.
Luke. To what, then will I compare the men of this generation,  to what are they like?
Luke. They are like children sitting in the marketplace,  calling to each other,  saying, We piped to you,  ye did not dance. We mourned to you,  ye did not weep.
Luke. For John the immerser has come neither eating bread nor drinking wine,  ye say, He has a demon.
Luke. The Son of man has come eating and drinking,  ye say, Behold the man, a glutton and a drunkard, a friend of tax collectors and sinners!
Luke. And wisdom is justified from all her children.
Luke. And a certain man of the Pharisees asked him that he would eat with him. And having entered into the Pharisee's house, he sat down.
Luke. And behold, a woman in the city who was sinful. And when she knew that he sat in the Pharisee's house, having brought an alabaster cruse of ointment,
Luke. and having stood behind near his feet, weeping, she began to wet his feet with the tears,  wiped them with the hair of her head. And she kissed his feet much,  anointed them with the ointment.
Luke. But when the Pharisee who invited him saw it, he spoke within himself, saying, This man, if he were a prophet, would know who and what kind the woman is who touches him, that she is sinful.
Luke. And having responded, Jesus said to him, Simon, I have something to say to thee. And he says, speak Teacher.
Luke. There were two debtors to a certain creditor, the one owed five hundred denarii,  the other fifty.
Luke. And of them not having to repay, he forgave them both. Which of them therefore, do thou say, will love him more?
Luke. And having answered, Simon said, I suppose that it was to whom he forgave more. And he said to him, Thou have judged correctly.
Luke. And having turned to the woman, he said to Simon, See thou this woman? I entered into thy house; thou gave no water for my feet. But this woman has wet my feet with tears,  wiped them with the hairs of her head.
Luke. Thou gave me no kiss,  this woman, since I came in, has not ceased kissing my feet much.
Luke. Thou did not anoint my head with olive oil,  this woman has anointed my feet with ointment.
Luke. For this reason I say to thee, her many sins are forgiven, because she loved much. But to whom little is forgiven, loves little.
Luke. And he said to her, Thy sins are forgiven.
Luke. And those who sat together began to say within themselves, Who is this who even forgives sins?
Luke. And he said to the woman, Thy faith has saved thee. Go in peace.
Luke. And it came to pass that he traveled through, by city and village in succession, announcing and preaching the good news of the kingdom of God,  the twelve men with him,
Luke. and certain women who were healed from evil spirits and infirmities: Mary who was called Magdalene, from whom seven demons had gone out,
Luke. and Joanna the wife of Chuza, Herod's steward,  Susanna,  many other women who served them from the things they possessed.
Luke. And when a large multitude gathered together,  those coming to him from each city, he spoke by a parable.
Luke. The man who sows went forth to sow his seed. And during his sowing, some fell by the way,  it was trampled,  the birds of the sky devoured it.
Luke. And another fell on the rock,  having grown, it withered away because of not having moisture.
Luke. And another fell amidst the thorns,  having grown together, the thorns choked it.
Luke. And another fell on the good ground,  having grown it produced fruit a hundredfold. As he said these things, he called out, He who has ears to hear, let him hear.
Luke. And his disciples questioned him, saying, What is this parable?
Luke. And he said, To you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of God,  to the others in parables, so that seeing they would not see,  hearing they would not understand.
Luke. Now the parable is this. The seed is the word of God.
Luke. And those by the way are those who hear, then the devil comes,  takes away the word from their heart, lest having believed, they would be saved.
Luke. And those on the rock are those who, when they hear, receive the word with joy. And these have no root, who believe for a time,  withdraw in time of trial.
Luke. And that which fell in the thorns, these are those who heard,  as they go they are choked by cares and wealth and pleasures of life,  do not bring to maturity.
Luke. But those in the good ground, these are those who in an good and right heart, having heard the word, hold it firm,  bring forth fruit in perseverance.
Luke. And no man, having lit a lamp, covers it with a container, or places it under a bed,  places it on a lampstand, so that those who enter in may see the light.
Luke. For there is no secret that will not become visible, nor hid, that will not be known and come to be visible.
Luke. Notice therefore how ye hear. For whoever has, to him will be given,  whoever has not, even what he seems to have will be taken from him.
Luke. And his mother and brothers came to him,  they could not come near him because of the crowd.
Luke. And it was reported to him, saying, Thy mother and thy brothers stand outside, desiring to see thee.
Luke. But having answered, he said to them, My mother and my brothers are these who hear the word of God and do it.
Luke. Now it came to pass on one of those days, that he entered into a boat, also his disciples. And he said to them, Let us pass through to the other side of the lake. And they launched forth,
Luke. but as they sailed he began to asleep. And a storm of wind came down on the lake,  they were filling up,  were in peril.
Luke. And having approached, they awoke him, saying, Master, master, we are perishing. And having risen, he rebuked the wind and the raging of the water,  they ceased,  it became calm.
Luke. And he said to them, Where is your faith? And having feared, they wondered, saying to each other, Who then is this man, that he commands even the winds and the water,  they obey him?
Luke. And they sailed toward the country of the Gadarenes, which is opposite Galilee.
Luke. And when he came forth upon the land, a certain man met him out of the city, who had demons of a considerable time. And he wore no clothing,  did not dwell in a house,  in the sepulchers.
Luke. And when he saw Jesus, having cried out, he fell down before him. And in a great voice he said, What is with me and with thee, Jesus, thou Son of the Most High God? I beseech thee, do not torment me.
Luke. For he commanded the unclean spirit to come out from the man, for many times it had seized him. And he was bound with chains and shackles,  guarded. And breaking the bonds apart, he was driven by the demon into the desolate regions.
Luke. And Jesus demanded him, saying, What is thy name? And he said, Legion, because many demons were entered into him.
Luke. And they entreated him that he would not command them to go out into the abyss.
Luke. Now a herd of considerable swine was there feeding on the mountain,  they implored him that he would allow them to enter into those. And he allowed them.
Luke. And the demons having come out from the man, they entered into the swine. And the herd stampeded down the slope into the lake,  were drowned.
Luke. And when those who tended them saw what happened, they fled and reported it in the city and in the fields.
Luke. And they came out to see what happened. And they came to Jesus,  found the man, from whom the demons had gone out, sitting near the feet of Jesus, clothed and in his right mind. And they were afraid.
Luke. And also those who saw it informed them how the man who was demon-possessed was saved.
Luke. And the whole multitude of the region around the Gadarenes besought him to depart from them, because they were gripped by great fear. And he, having embarked into the boat, returned.
Luke. But the man from whom the demons had gone out begged him to be with him. But Jesus sent him away, saying,
Luke. Return to thy house,  relate everything God did for thee. And he departed, proclaiming throughout the whole city how many things Jesus did for him.
Luke. And it came to pass during Jesus returning, the multitude welcomed him, for they were all waiting for him.
Luke. And behold, there came a man whose name was Jairus,  he was a ruler of the synagogue. And having fallen down near Jesus' feet, he besought him to come into his house,
Luke. because there was with him an only begotten daughter, about twelve years old,  she was dying. But during his going the multitudes thronged him.
Luke. And a woman being with an issue of blood for twelve years, who, although she spent her entire living on physicians, was unable to be healed by any,
Luke. having come from behind, she touched the border of his garment. And immediately the issue of her blood stayed.
Luke. And Jesus said, Who is he who touched me? But when they all denied, Peter and those with him, said, Master, the multitudes come together and crowd thee,  thou say, Who is he who touched me?
Luke. But Jesus said, Who touched me? For I perceived power having gone forth from me.
Luke. And when the woman saw that she was not hid, she came trembling. And having fallen down before him, she declared to him in the presence of all the people for what reason she touched him,  how she was healed immediately.
Luke. And he said to her, Cheer up, Daughter. Thy faith has healed thee. Go in peace.
Luke. While he still spoke, some man comes from the synagogue ruler, saying to him, Thy daughter has died. Do not trouble the teacher.
Luke. But having heard it, Jesus answered him, saying, Fear not, only believe and she will be saved.
Luke. And when he came to the house, he did not allow any man to enter in except Peter and John and James,  the father of the girl and the mother.
Luke. And all were weeping and bewailing her. But he said, Weep not. She did not die,  sleeps.
Luke. And they ridiculed him, knowing that she died.
Luke. But having sent them all away outside, having taken her by the hand, he called out, saying, Girl, awake.
Luke. And her spirit returned,  she rose up immediately. And he commanded to give her to eat.
Luke. And her parents were amazed,  he ordered them to tell no man that which happened.
Luke. And having summoned the twelve, he gave them power and authority over all demons,  to heal diseases.
Luke. And he sent them to preach the kingdom of God,  to heal those who were incapacitated.
Luke. And he said to them, Take nothing for the way, neither staffs, nor bag, nor bread, nor silver, nor have two coats each.
Luke. And into whatever house ye may enter, remain there,  from there depart.
Luke. And as many as will not receive you, when departing from that city, also shake off the dust from your feet for a testimony against them.
Luke. And having departed, they passed through the villages, preaching the good news,  healing everywhere.
Luke. But Herod the tetrarch heard of all that was done by him. And he was perplexed, because it was said by some that John was risen from the dead,
Luke. and by some that Elijah appeared,  by others that a prophet, one of the ancient men arose.
Luke. And Herod said, I beheaded John,  who is this about whom I hear such things? And he sought to see him.
Luke. And when the apostles returned, they related to him as many things as they did. And having taken them along, he withdrew in private into a desolate place of a city called Bethsaida.
Luke. But the multitudes having known, they followed him. And having received them, he spoke to them about the kingdom of God,  he cured those who had need of healing.
Luke. And the day began to decline,  the twelve having come near, they said to him, Send the multitude away, so that, after going into the villages and fields around, they may rest and find provision, because we are here in a desolate place.
Luke. But he said to them, Give ye them to eat. And they said, There are for us not more than five loaves and two fishes, unless, after going, we might buy food for all this people.
Luke. For there were about five thousand men. And he said to his disciples, Make them sit down in groups of fifty each.
Luke. And they did so,  made them all sit down.
Luke. And after taking the five loaves and the two fishes, having looked up to heaven, he blessed them,  broke in pieces,  gave to the disciples to set before the multitude.
Luke. And they ate,  were all filled. And there were taken up to them of the remaining fragments, twelve baskets.
Luke. And it came to pass, as he was praying privately, the disciples were with him. And he questioned them, saying, Who do the multitudes say that I am?
Luke. And having answered, they said, John the immerser,  others, Elijah,  others, that a certain prophet of the ancient men arose.
Luke. And he said to them, But ye, who say ye that I am? And having answered, Peter said, The Christ of God.
Luke. But having chided them, he commanded to tell this to no man,
Luke. saying, It is necessary for the Son of man to suffer many things,  be rejected by the elders and chief priests and scholars,  be killed,  the third day to rise.
Luke. And he said to all, If any man wants to come behind me, let him deny himself,  take up his cross,  follow me.
Luke. For whoever wants to save his life will lose it,  whoever may lose his life because of me, this man will save it.
Luke. For what is a man benefited, having gained the whole world,  having lost or having forfeited himself?
Luke. For whoever may be ashamed of me and of my words, the Son of man will be ashamed of this man when he comes in his glory,  of the Father,  of the holy agents.
Luke. But I tell you truly, there are some of those who stand here, who will, no, not taste of death, till they see the kingdom of God.
Luke. And it came to pass about eight days after these sayings, that after taking Peter and John and James, he went up onto the mountain to pray.
Luke. And as he was praying, the appearance of his face became different,  his clothing glistening white.
Luke. And behold, two men talked with him, who were Moses and Elijah,
Luke. who, having appeared in glory, spoke of his departure, which he was going to fulfill at Jerusalem.
Luke. But Peter and those with him were weighed down with sleep,  having become awake, they saw his glory,  the two men who stood with him.
Luke. And it came to pass, as they were departing from him, Peter said to Jesus, Master, it is good for us to be here,  we could make three tabernacles, one for thee,  one for Moses,  one for Elijah, not knowing what he was saying.
Luke. And while he was speaking these things, a cloud came and overshadowed them. And they were afraid as they entered into the cloud.
Luke. And a voice came out of the cloud, saying, This is my beloved Son. Hear ye him.
Luke. And at the occurrence of the voice, Jesus was found alone. And they kept silent,  informed no man in those days any of the things that they have seen.
Luke. And it came to pass, on the next day, when they came down from the mountain, a large crowd met him.
Luke. And behold, a man from the crowd cried out, saying, Teacher, I beseech thee to look upon my son, because he is the only begotten to me.
Luke. And lo, a spirit seizes him,  he suddenly cries out,  it convulses him with foaming. And it departs from him difficultly, injuring him.
Luke. And I begged thy disciples that they might cast it out,  they could not.
Luke. And having answered, Jesus said, O faithless and perverted generation, how long will I be with you and endure you? Bring thy son here.
Luke. And as he was still coming, the demon tore him,  he convulsed. But Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit,  healed the boy,  gave him back to his father.
Luke. And they were all amazed at the majesty of God. But while all were wondering at all the things which Jesus did, he said to his disciples,
Luke. Place ye these sayings into your ears, for the Son of man is going to be delivered up into the hands of men.
Luke. But they did not understand this saying,  it was concealed from them, so that they did not perceive it. And they were afraid to ask him about this saying.
Luke. But a thought entered among them, which of them may be greater.
Luke. But having perceived the thought of their heart, having taken a child, Jesus stood it beside him,
Luke. and he said to them, Whoever may receive this child in my name receives me,  whoever may receive me receives him who sent me, for he who exists smaller among you all, this man will be great.
Luke. And having answered, John said, Master, we saw a certain man casting out demons in thy name,  we forbade him, because he does not follow with us.
Luke. But Jesus said to him, Do not forbid, for he who is not against us is for us.
Luke. And it came to pass, while fulfilling the days for his ascension, that he also set his face to go to Jerusalem.
Luke. And he sent agents before his face,  they went. And having gone, they entered into a village of Samaritans, so as to make ready for him.
Luke. And they did not receive him, because his face was going to Jerusalem.
Luke. And his disciples James and John having seen, they said, Lord, do thou want that we should call fire to come down from the sky,  consume them, as also Elijah did?
Luke. But having turned around, he rebuked them,  said, Ye do not know what kind of spirit ye are.
Luke. For the Son of man came not to destroy the lives of men,  to save. And they went to another village.
Luke. And it came to pass while they went on the way, a certain man said to him, I will follow thee wherever thou may go, Lord.
Luke. And Jesus said to him, The foxes have holes,  the birds of the sky, nests,  the Son of man has not where he might lay his head.
Luke. And he said to another, Follow me. But he said, Lord, allow me first, after departing, to bury my father.
Luke. But Jesus said to him, Leave the dead to bury their own dead,  thou, after departing, proclaim the kingdom of God.
Luke. And also another said, I will follow thee, Lord,  first allow me to bid farewell to those in my house.
Luke. But Jesus said to him, No man, having put his hand to a plow,  looking to things behind, is fit for the kingdom of God.
Luke. Now after these things the Lord also appointed seventy other men,  sent them by twos before his face into every city and place where he himself was going to come.
Luke. Therefore he said to them, The harvest indeed is plentiful,  the workmen are few. Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he would send forth workmen into his harvest.
Luke. Go ye. Behold, I send you forth as lambs in the midst of wolves.
Luke. Carry no bag, no pouch, no shoes,  greet no man on the way.
Luke. And into whatever house ye enter, first say, Peace to this house.
Luke. And if a son of peace is there, your peace will rest upon him,  if not, it will return to you.
Luke. And remain in the same house eating and drinking from their things, for the workman is worthy of his wage. Do not depart from house to house.
Luke. And into whatever city ye enter,  they receive you, eat the things that are set before you.
Luke. And heal the weak in it,  say to them, The kingdom of God has come near to you.
Luke. But into whatever city ye enter,  they will not receive you, after departing into the thoroughfares of it, say,
Luke. Even the dust that clings on us from your city, we wipe off against you. Nevertheless know ye this, that the kingdom of God has come near to you.
Luke. I say to you, that it will be more tolerable in that day for Sodom, than for that city.
Luke. Woe to thee, Chorazin! Woe to thee, Bethsaida! Because if the mighty works were done in Tyre and Sidon, which were done in you, they would have repented long ago, sitting in sackcloth and ashes.
Luke. But it will be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon in the judgment, than for you.
Luke. And thou, Capernaum, which was exalted to the sky, will be thrust down to Hades.
Luke. He who hears you hears me,  he who rejects you rejects me,  he who rejects me rejects him who sent me.
Luke. And the seventy returned with joy, saying, Lord, even the demons are made subject to us in thy name.
Luke. And he said to them, I beheld Satan fallen as lightning from the sky.
Luke. Behold, I give you authority to tread over serpents and scorpions,  over all the power of the enemy, , no, nothing will harm you.
Luke. Nevertheless do not rejoice in this, that the spirits are made subject to you,  rejoice because your names are written in the heavens.
Luke. In the same hour Jesus rejoiced in the Spirit,  said, I thank thee, Father, Lord of the heaven and the earth, that thou hid these things from the wise and astute,  revealed them to the childlike. Yea, Father, because it became pleasing this way in thy sight.
Luke. And having turned to the disciples, he said, All things were delivered to me by my Father. And no man knows who the Son is, except the Father,  who the Father is, except the Son,  he to whomever the Son wants to reveal him.
Luke. And having turning toward the disciples in private, he said, Blessed are the eyes that see what ye see.
Luke. For I say to you, that many prophets and kings desired to see what ye see,  did not see,  to hear what ye hear,  did not hear.
Luke. And behold, a certain lawyer stood up testing him,  saying, Teacher, having done what, would I inherit eternal life?
Luke. And he said to him, What is written in the law? How read thou?
Luke. And having answered, he said, Thou shall love the Lord thy God from thy whole heart,  from thy whole soul,  from thy whole strength,  from thy whole mind,  thy neighbor as thyself.
Luke. And he said to him, Thou answered correctly. Do this and thou will live.
Luke. But he, wanting to justify himself, said to Jesus, And who is my neighbor?
Luke. And having replied, Jesus said, A certain man was going down from Jerusalem to Jericho. And he encountered bandits, who also, having stripped him and having beat him, departed having left him being half dead.
Luke. And by coincidence a certain priest was going down on that road,  when he saw him, he passed by on the other side.
Luke. And likewise also a Levite who happened upon the place, having come,  having looked, passed by on the other side.
Luke. But a certain Samaritan, as he journeyed, came to him,  when he saw him, felt compassion.
Luke. And having come, he wrapped up his wounds, pouring on olive oil and wine. And having set him on his own beast, he brought him to an inn,  took care of him.
Luke. And on the morrow when departing, after taking out two denarii, he gave them to the innkeeper,  said to him, Take care of him,  whatever thou might spend more, I will repay thee at my return.
Luke. Which therefore, of these three, appears to thee to have become neighbor to the man who fell among the bandits?
Luke. And he said, He who did mercy with him. Therefore Jesus said to him, Go,  do thou likewise.
Luke. And it came to pass as they went, he also entered into a certain village,  a certain woman named Martha received him into her house.
Luke. And she was sister to this woman called Mary, who also, having sat at Jesus' feet, was listening to his word.
Luke. But Martha was encumbered about much serving. And having stood near, she said, Lord, do thou not care that my sister left me behind to serve alone? Speak to her therefore that she may help me.
Luke. But having answered, Jesus said to her, Martha, Martha, thou are anxious and troubled about many things,
Luke. but one thing is necessary,  Mary has chosen the good part, which will not be taken away from her.
Luke. And it came to pass as he was in a certain place praying, that when he ceased, a certain man of his disciples said to him, Lord, teach us to pray as John also taught his disciples.
Luke. And he said to them, When ye pray, say, Our Father in the heavens, hallowed be thy name. May thy kingdom come, may thy will happen on the earth as also in heaven.
Luke. Give us our bread sufficient for each day.
Luke. And forgive us our sins, for we ourselves also forgive every man who is indebted to us. And bring us not into temptation,  deliver us from evil.
Luke. And he said to them, Which of you will have a friend,  will go to him at midnight,  say to him, Friend, lend me three loaves,
Luke. since a friend arrived from the road to me,  I do not have what I would set before him,
Luke. and that man from inside, having answered, would say, Do not cause toils for me. The door is now shut,  my children are with me in bed. I am not able, after getting up, to give thee?
Luke. I say to you, though he will not give him, after getting up, because he is his friend, yet because of his persistence, having awaken, he will give him as many as he needs.
Luke. And I say to you, ask,  it will be given you. Seek,  ye will find. Knock,  it will be opened.
Luke. For every man who asks receives,  he who seeks finds,  to him who knocks it will be opened.
Luke. And which father of you, if the son will ask a loaf, will give him a stone, or also if a fish, in place of a fish will give him a serpent?
Luke. Or if he should ask for an egg, will he give him a scorpion?
Luke. If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more the Father from heaven will give the Holy Spirit to those who ask him?
Luke. And he was casting out a demon,  it was mute. And it happened when the demon was gone out, the mute man spoke. And the multitudes marveled,
Luke. but some of them said, He casts out the demons by Beelzebub, ruler of the demons.
Luke. And others, challenging, sought from him a sign from the sky.
Luke. But he, knowing their thoughts, said to them, Every kingdom that was divided against itself is made desolate,  a house against a house falls.
Luke. And if Satan also is divided against himself, how will his kingdom be made to stand? Because ye say that I cast out the demons by Beelzebub.
Luke. And if I cast out the demons by Beelzebub, by whom do your sons cast them out? Because of this they will be your judges.
Luke. But if by a finger of God I cast out the demons, then the kingdom of God has come upon you.
Luke. When the fully armed strong man guards his palace, the things possessed by him are in peace,
Luke. but when a stronger than he comes, after defeating him, he takes away his full armor in which he trusted,  divides his booty.
Luke. He who is not with me is against me,  he who does not gather with me scatters.
Luke. When the unclean spirit departs out of the man, it passes through waterless places seeking rest. And not finding, it says, I will return to my house from where I came out.
Luke. And when it comes, it finds it swept and put in order.
Luke. Then it goes,  takes along seven other spirits more evil than itself,  having enter in, it dwells there. And the last state of that man becomes worse than the first.
Luke. And it came to pass, as he said these things, a certain woman, having lifted up her voice out of the crowd, said to him, Blessed is the belly that bore thee,  the breasts that thou suckled.
Luke. But he said, Blessed rather, are those who hear the word of God,  keep it.
Luke. And when the multitudes gathered together he began to say, This generation is evil. They seek a sign,  no sign will be given to it except the sign of Jonah, the prophet.
Luke. For as Jonah became a sign to the Ninevites, so also the Son of man will be to this generation.
Luke. The queen of the south will awake in the judgment with the men of this generation,  will condemn them, because she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon,  behold, a greater than Solomon is here.
Luke. The men of Nineveh will rise up in the judgment with this generation,  will condemn it, because they repented at the preaching of Jonah,  behold, a greater than Jonah is here.
Luke. And no man, having lit a lamp, puts it in a concealed place, nor under the bushel,  on the lampstand, so that those who enter in may see the light.
Luke. The lamp of thy body is the eye. Therefore, when thine eye is sound, thy whole body is also bright,  when it is bad, thy body is also dark.
Luke. Watch therefore the light in thee not be darkness.
Luke. If therefore thy whole body is bright, not having any part dark, the whole will be bright, as when the lamp illuminates thee by the radiance.
Luke. Now as he spoke a certain Pharisee asks him that he might dine with him. And having entered in, he sat down.
Luke. And when the Pharisee saw, he marveled that he did not first wash before dinner.
Luke. And the Lord said to him, Now ye Pharisees cleanse the outside of the cup and of the platter,  your interior is full of plundering and wickedness.
Luke. Ye foolish men, did not he who made the outside also make the inside?
Luke. But give compassion, things that are inside,  behold, all things are clean to you.
Luke. But woe to you Pharisees! Because ye tithe mint and rue and every plant,  pass by justice and the love of God. It is necessary to do these things,  not to neglect those things.
Luke. Woe to you Pharisees! Because ye love the place of honor in the synagogues,  the greetings in the marketplaces.
Luke. Woe to you scholars and Pharisees, hypocrites! Because ye are like the unseen sepulchers,  the men who walk over them do not know.
Luke. And having answered, a certain man of the lawyers says to him, Teacher, in saying these things thou rebuke us also.
Luke. And he said, Woe also to you lawyers! Because ye load men with burdens difficult to bear,  ye yourselves touch not the burdens with one of your fingers.
Luke. Woe to you! Because ye build the sepulchers of the prophets,  your fathers killed them.
Luke. Consequently, ye testify and approve the works of your fathers, because they indeed killed them,  ye build their sepulchers.
Luke. Because of this also the wisdom of God said, I will send to them prophets and apostles. And some of them they will kill and persecute,
Luke. so that the blood of all the prophets that was shed from the foundation of the world may be required of this generation,
Luke. from the blood of Abel to the blood of Zachariah, who perished between the altar and the sanctuary. Yes, I say to you, it will be required of this generation.
Luke. Woe to you lawyers! Because ye took away the key of knowledge. Ye did not enter in yourselves,  ye hindered those who were entering in.
Luke. And after he said these things to them, the scholars and the Pharisees began to harass him extremely,  to provoke him to speak impulsively about more things,
Luke. waiting to ambush him, seeking to catch something out of his mouth so that they might accuse him.
Luke. During which time the myriads of the multitude having gathered together so as to trample each other, he began first to say to his disciples, Take heed to yourselves from the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy.
Luke. But there is nothing covered up that will not be revealed,  hidden that will not be known.
Luke. Therefore, as many things as ye have said in the darkness will be heard in the light,  what ye have spoken in the ear in the inner chambers will be proclaimed upon the housetops.
Luke. And I say to you my friends, Be not afraid of those who kill the body,  after these things not having anything more severe to do.
Luke. But I will show you whom ye should fear. Fear him, who, after killing, has power to cast into hell. Yes, I say to you, fear ye him.
Luke. Are not five sparrows sold for two copper coins? And not one of them is forgotten in the sight of God.
Luke. But even the hairs of your head are all numbered. Fear not, therefore, ye are superior to many sparrows.
Luke. And I say to you, every man who will confess in me before men, the Son of man will also confess in him before the agents of God,
Luke. but he who denies me in the presence of men will be denied in the presence of the agents of God.
Luke. And every man who will speak a word against the Son of man, it will be forgiven him,  to him who blasphemed against the Holy Spirit it will not be forgiven.
Luke. And when they bring you to the synagogues,  the principle positions,  the offices of authority, be not anxious how or what ye should answer in defense, or what ye should say,
Luke. for the Holy Spirit will teach you in the same hour what ye ought to say.
Luke. And a certain man out of the crowd said to him, Teacher, speak to my brother to divide the inheritance with me.
Luke. But he said to him, Man, who appointed me a judge or an arbitrator over you?
Luke. And he said to them, Watch,  keep away from greed, because to any man, life to him is not in the abundance of things possessed by him.
Luke. And he spoke a parable to them, saying, The land of a certain rich man brought forth well.
Luke. And he pondered within himself, saying, What shall I do, because I have nowhere I will store my crops?
Luke. And he said, I will do this. I will dismantle my barns,  I will build greater,  there I will store all my grain and my goods.
Luke. And I will say to my soul, Soul, thou have many goods laid up for many years. Take thine ease, eat, drink, be merry.
Luke. But God said to him, Thou foolish man, they demand thy soul from thee this night,  the things that thou prepared, whose will they be?
Luke. So is he who stores up for himself,  is not being rich toward God.
Luke. And he said to his disciples, Because of this I say to you, be not anxious for your life, what ye may eat, nor for the body, what ye may wear.
Luke. For the life is more than the food,  the body, the clothing.
Luke. Consider the ravens, because they do not sow, nor do they reap, for which there is no storehouse nor barn,  God feeds them. How much ye are worth more than the birds.
Luke. And which of you by being anxious can add one cubit to his age?
Luke. If then ye are not able to do even the least, why are ye anxious about the rest?
Luke. Consider the lilies, how they grow. They toil not, nor do they spin,  I say to you, not even Solomon in all his glory was arrayed like one of these.
Luke. And if God so clothes the grass in the field, which today is,  tomorrow being cast into the oven, how much more you, O ye of little faith?
Luke. And do not seek what ye may eat,  what ye may drink,  do not be unsettled.
Luke. For the nations of the world seek all these things,  your Father knows that ye have need of these things.
Luke. However, seek ye the kingdom of God,  all these things will be added to you.
Luke. Fear not, little flock, because your Father is well pleased to give you the kingdom.
Luke. Sell things possessed by you,  give charity. Make for yourselves purses not becoming old, a treasure unfailing in the heavens, where no thief approaches, nor moth corrupts.
Luke. For where your treasure is, there your heart will be also.
Luke. Let your loins be girded about,  the lights burning,
Luke. and be ye like men waiting for their lord, when he may return from the wedding festivities, so that when he comes and knocks, they may straightaway open to him.
Luke. Blessed are those bondmen whom the lord when he comes will find watching. Truly I say to you, that he will gird himself,  will cause them to sit down,  having come, will serve them.
Luke. And if he should come in the second watch,  should come in the third watch,  find so, blessed are those bondmen.
Luke. But know this, that if the house-ruler had known in what hour the thief was coming, he would have watched,  would not have allowed his house to be broken into.
Luke. Therefore, ye also become ready, because the Son of man comes at that hour ye do not suppose.
Luke. And Peter said to him, Lord, did thou speak this parable to us, or also to all?
Luke. And the Lord said, Who then is the faithful and wise manager whom his lord will appoint over his service to give the provision on time?
Luke. Blessed is that bondman whom his lord when he comes will find so doing.
Luke. Truly I say to you, that he will appoint him over the things being possessed by him.
Luke. But if that bondman should say in his heart, My lord is late to come,  should begin to beat the servant boys and the servant girls,  to eat and drink,  to be drunken,
Luke. the lord of that bondman will arrive in a day that he does not expect,  in an hour that he is not aware,  will cut him in two,  will place his portion with the unbelieving.
Luke. And that bondman who knew his lord's will,  who did not prepare, nor do according to his will, will be beaten much,
Luke. but he who did not know,  did things worthy of blows, will be beaten little. And to every man to whom much was given, much will be required from him. And to whom they entrust much, they will ask him more abundantly.
Luke. I came to cast fire upon the earth,  what I desire is if it were kindled already.
Luke. But I have an immersion to be immersed,  how am I constrained until it will be accomplished.
Luke. Do ye suppose that I came to give peace on the earth? I tell you, no,  rather division.
Luke. For henceforth there will be five in one house divided, three against two,  two against three.
Luke. A father will be divided against a son,  a son against a father, a mother against a daughter,  a daughter against a mother, a mother-in-law against her daughter-in-law,  a daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law.
Luke. And he also said to the multitudes, When ye see a cloud rising from the west, straightaway ye say, A shower is coming,  so it happens.
Luke. And when a south wind is blowing, ye say, There will be heat,  it happens.
Luke. Ye hypocrites, ye know how to examine the face of the earth and the sky,  how can ye not examine this season?
Luke. And also why do ye not judge yourselves what is right?
Luke. For when thou go with thine opponent to the magistrate on the way give effort to be delivered from him, lest he may drag thee to the judge,  the judge may deliver thee to the officer,  the officer would cast thee into prison.
Luke. I say to thee, thou will, no, not come out from there, until thou have paid even the last mite.
Luke. Now some were present at the same time who informed him about the Galileans whose blood Pilate mingled with their sacrifices.
Luke. And having answered, Jesus said to them, Do ye suppose that these Galileans became sinful above all the Galileans because they have suffered such things?
Luke. I tell you, no,  if ye do not repent, ye will all perish similarly.
Luke. Or those eighteen upon whom the tower in Siloam fell and killed them. Do ye think that these became debtors above all the men who dwell in Jerusalem?
Luke. I tell you, no,  if ye do not repent, ye will all likewise perish.
Luke. And he spoke this parable. A certain man had a fig tree planted in his vineyard,  he came seeking fruit on it,  found none.
Luke. And he said to the vine workman, Behold, three years I come seeking fruit on this fig tree,  find none. Cut it down, why also waste the ground?
Luke. And having answered, he says to him, Sir, allow it this year also until I may dig around it and cast manure.
Luke. Although surely it should bear fruit,  if not, in the coming year thou will cut it down.
Luke. And he was teaching in one of the synagogues on the sabbath day.
Luke. And behold, there was a woman who had a spirit of infirmity eighteen years. And she was bent over,  not being able to straighten up completely.
Luke. And when Jesus saw her, he called out,  said to her, Woman, thou are loosed from thine infirmity.
Luke. And he laid his hands upon her,  immediately she was made straight,  glorified God.
Luke. And having responded, the synagogue-ruler, being indignant because Jesus healed on the sabbath, answered and said to the multitude, There are six days in which he ought to work. Therefore coming in these, be healed,  not on the day of the sabbath.
Luke. But the Lord therefore answered him and said, Ye hypocrites, does not each of you on the sabbath loose his ox or his donkey from the stall,  after leading away, give to drink?
Luke. And ought not this woman, being a daughter of Abraham whom Satan has bound, lo, eighteen years, be loosed from this bond on the day of the sabbath?
Luke. And as he said these things all those opposing him were shamed,  all the multitude rejoiced for all the glorious things that were done by him.
Luke. And he said, What is the kingdom of God like,  to what will I compare it?
Luke. It is like a grain of a mustard plant, which having taken, a man cast into his own garden. And it grew and developed into a great tree,  the birds of the sky lodged in the branches if it.
Luke. And again he said, To what will I compare the kingdom of God?
Luke. It is like leaven that a woman having taken, hid in three measures of meal, until the whole was leavened.
Luke. And he went through by cities and villages, teaching,  making a journey toward Jerusalem.
Luke. And a certain man said to him, Lord, are they few who are being saved? And he said to them,
Luke. Compete to enter in by the narrow gate, because many, I say to you, will seek to enter in,  will not be able.
Luke. From the time the house-ruler has risen up,  has closed the door,  ye begin to stand outside,  to knock the door, saying, Lord, Lord, open to us,  having answered, he will say to you, I know not where ye are from,
Luke. then ye will begin to say, We ate and drank in thy presence,  thou taught in our thoroughfares.
Luke. And he will say, I tell you, I know not where ye are from. Depart from me, all ye workmen of unrighteousness.
Luke. There will be the weeping and the gnashing of teeth, when ye will see Abraham and Isaac and Jacob and all the prophets in the kingdom of God,  you being thrust out.
Luke. And they will arrive from the east and west,  from the north and south,  will sit down in the kingdom of God.
Luke. And behold, there are last who will be first,  there are first who will be last.
Luke. In the same day some Pharisees came, saying to him, Get thee out and depart from here, because Herod wants to kill thee.
Luke. And he said to them, Having gone, say to this fox, Behold, I cast out demons and finish cures today and tomorrow,  the third day I am fully perfected.
Luke. Nevertheless it is necessary for me to go today and tomorrow and the following, because it is not possible for a prophet to perish outside of Jerusalem.
Luke. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that kills the prophets,  stones those who are sent to her. How often I wanted to gather thy children together as a hen does her brood under her wings,  ye would not.
Luke. Behold, your house is left to you desolate. And I say to you, that ye will, no, not see me, until it will come when ye say, Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord.
Luke. And it came to pass, when he went into the house of a certain man of the chiefs of the Pharisees on a sabbath to eat bread, that they were watching him.
Luke. And behold, there was a certain man in front of him afflicted with edema.
Luke. And having responded, Jesus spoke to the lawyers and Pharisees, saying, Is it permitted to heal on the sabbath?
Luke. But they were silent. And having taken him, he healed him and released him.
Luke. And having responded, he said to them, Of which of you will a son or an ox fall into a pit,  he will not straightaway lift him out on the day of the sabbath?
Luke. And they could not answer him back to these things.
Luke. And he spoke a parable to those who were invited when he noticed how they chose out the chief places, saying to them,
Luke. When thou are invited by any man to wedding festivities, do not sit down in the chief place, lest there may be a more honorable man than thou who was invited by him.
Luke. And he who invited thee and him, having come, will say to thee, Give place to this man,  then thou will begin with embarrassment to take the last place.
Luke. But when thou are invited, having gone, sit down in the last place, so that when he who has invited thee comes, he will say to thee, Friend, go up higher, then it will be esteem to thee in the presence of those dining with thee.
Luke. Because every man who lifts himself up will be made lower,  he who makes himself lower will be lifted up.
Luke. And he also said to the man who invited him, When thou make a dinner or a supper, do not call thy friends, nor thy brothers, nor thy kinsmen, nor prosperous neighbors, lest they also invite thee in return,  a recompense be made to thee.
Luke. But when thou make a feast, call the poor, the maimed, the lame, the blind,
Luke. and thou will be blessed, because they do not have to recompense thee, for it will be recompensed to thee at the resurrection of the righteous.
Luke. And a certain man of those dining together having heard these things, he said to him, Blessed is he who will eat dinner in the kingdom of God.
Luke. And he said to him, A certain man made a great supper,  he invited many.
Luke. And he sent forth his bondman at the hour of the meal to say to those who were invited, Come, because all things are now ready.
Luke. And they all from one began to make excuse. The first said to him, I have bought a field,  I have need to go out and see it. I ask thee have me excused.
Luke. And another said, I bought five yoke of oxen,  I go to test them. I ask thee have me excused.
Luke. And another said, I married a wife,  because of this I cannot come.
Luke. And that bondman, having come, he informed his lord these things. Then the house-ruler having become angry, he said to his bondman, Go out quickly into the thoroughfares and lanes of the city,  bring here the poor and maimed and crippled and blind.
Luke. And the bondman said, Lord, as thou commanded it has happened,  yet there is room.
Luke. And the lord said to the bondman, Go out into the roads and hedges,  compel them to come in, that my house may be filled.
Luke. For I say to you, that none of those men who were invited will taste of my supper. For many are called,  few chosen.
Luke. Now many multitudes went with him,  having turned, he said to them,
Luke. If any man comes to me,  does not regard as inferior his father,  mother,  wife,  children,  brothers,  sisters,  besides his own life also, he cannot be my disciple.
Luke. And whoever does not bear his cross,  come behind me, cannot be my disciple.
Luke. For which of you wanting to build a tower, does not, having first sat down, count the cost whether he has the things for completion?
Luke. So that perhaps, having laid its foundation,  not being able to finish, all those who see begin to ridicule him,
Luke. saying, This man began to build,  was not able to finish.
Luke. Or what king going to encounter another king in war, will not, having first sat down, consult whether he is able with ten thousand to meet him who comes against him with twenty thousand?
Luke. And if not, while he is still far off, having sent a delegation, he asks the things about peace.
Luke. So therefore every man of you who does not renounce all things being possessed by him, cannot be my disciple.
Luke. The salt material is good,  if the salt material becomes tasteless, by what will it be seasoned?
Luke. It is fit neither for the land nor for manure; they cast it out. He who has ears to hear, let him hear.
Luke. Now all the tax collectors and sinners were approaching him to hear him.
Luke. And the Pharisees and the scholars murmured, saying, This man receives sinners and eats with them.
Luke. And he spoke this parable to them, saying,
Luke. What man of you, having a hundred sheep,  having lost one of them, does not leave behind the ninety-nine in the wilderness,  go for that which was lost until he finds it?
Luke. And when he finds it, he lays it on his shoulders, rejoicing.
Luke. And when he comes to the house, he calls together his men friends and his men neighbors, saying to them, Rejoice with me, because I have found my sheep that was lost.
Luke. I say to you, that thus there will be joy in heaven over one sinner who repents, than over ninety-nine righteous men who have no need of repentance.
Luke. Or what woman having ten drachmas, if she lose one drachma, does not light a lamp,  sweep the house,  seek diligently until she finds it?
Luke. And when she has found it, she calls together her lady friends and lady neighbors, saying, Rejoice with me, because I found the drachma that I lost.
Luke. Thus I say to you, there becomes joy in the presence of the agents of God over one sinner who repents.
Luke. And he said, A certain man had two sons,
Luke. and the younger of them said to his father, Father, give me the portion of goods that falls to me. And he divided to them his living.
Luke. And not many days after, the younger son, having gathered all together, journeyed into a distant country,  there he squandered his wealth living recklessly.
Luke. And when he spent all, a mighty famine developed in that country,  he began to be in want.
Luke. And having gone, he was joined to one of the citizens of that country,  he sent him into his fields to feed swine.
Luke. And he longed to fill his belly from the husks that the swine ate,  no man gave to him.
Luke. But when he came to himself, he said, How many hired men of my father's have abundance of loaves,  I am perishing with hunger.
Luke. After rising, I will go to my father,  will say to him, Father, I have sinned against heaven and in thy sight.
Luke. I am no more worthy to be called thy son. Make me as one of thy hired men.
Luke. And having risen, he went to his father. But while he was still distant, afar off, his father saw him and felt compassion. And having ran, he fell on his neck,  kissed him much.
Luke. And the son said to him, Father, I have sinned against heaven and in thy sight. I am no more worthy to be called thy son.
Luke. But the father said to his bondmen, Bring forth the best robe and clothe him,  give a ring for his hand,  shoes for his feet.
Luke. And having brought the fatted calf, kill it,  having eaten, we will be cheerful,
Luke. because this my son was dead,  became alive again. And he was lost,  is found. And they began to be cheerful.
Luke. But his elder son was in a field. And while coming, having approached the house, he heard music and dancing.
Luke. And having summoned one of the boys, he inquired what these things might be.
Luke. And he said to him, Thy brother arrived,  thy father has killed the fatted calf, because he received him back healthy.
Luke. But he was angry,  would not go in. Therefore, his father having come out, he called him.
Luke. But having answered, he said to his father, Lo, so many years do I serve thee,  I never passed by a commandment of thine,  yet thou never gave me a goat that I might be merry with my friends.
Luke. But when this thy son came, who has devoured thy living with harlots, thou killed for him the fatted calf.
Luke. And he said to him, Child, thou are always with me,  all my things are yours.
Luke. But it was needful to make merry and be glad, because this thy brother was dead,  became alive again,  was lost,  was found.
Luke. And he also said to his disciples, There was a certain rich man who had a manager,  this man was accused to him as squandering things possessed by him.
Luke. And having called him, he said to him, What is this I hear about thee? Render the account of thy management, for thou can no longer manage.
Luke. And the manager said within himself, What shall I do because my lord takes away the management from me? I am not able to dig. I am ashamed to beg.
Luke. I know what I will do, so that when I am removed from the management they may receive me into their houses.
Luke. And having summoned each one of his lord's debtors, he said to the first, How much do thou owe to my lord?
Luke. And he said, A hundred measures of olive oil. And he said to him, Receive thy document,  having sat down, quickly write fifty.
Luke. Next he said to another, And how much do thou owe? And he said, A hundred measures of wheat. And he says to him, Receive thy document,  write eighty.
Luke. And his lord commended the unrighteous manager because he did shrewdly. Because the sons of this age are shrewder in their own generation than the sons of the light.
Luke. And I say to you, make friends for yourselves from the mammon of unrighteousness, so that, when ye cease, they may receive you into the eternal dwellings.
Luke. The man faithful in the least is faithful also in much,  the man unrighteous in the least is unrighteous also in much.
Luke. If therefore ye did not become faithful in the unrighteous mammon, who will entrust to you what is true?
Luke. And if ye did not become faithful in the alien, who will give thine to you?
Luke. No servant can serve two masters, for either he will hate the one and love the other, or he will hold to one and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon.
Luke. And the Pharisees, being lovers of money, heard all these things,  they sneered him.
Luke. And he said to them, Ye are those who declare yourselves righteous in the sight of men,  God knows your hearts. Because what is lofty among men is an abomination in the sight of God.
Luke. The law and the prophets were until John. From that time the kingdom of God is proclaimed good news,  every man in it is treated aggressively.
Luke. But it is easier for the heaven and the earth to pass away, than for one tittle of the law to fall.
Luke. Every man who divorces his wife and marries another, commits adultery,  every man who marries her who has been divorced from a husband commits adultery.
Luke. Now there was a certain rich man,  he was clothed in purple and fine linen, faring sumptuously daily.
Luke. But there was a certain poor man named Lazarus, who had been placed near his gate, covered with sores,
Luke. and longing to be fed with the crumbs that fell from the rich man's table. But even the dogs that came licked his sores.
Luke. And it came to pass for the poor man to die and be carried by the agents to Abraham's bosom. And the rich man also died and was buried.
Luke. And having lifted up his eyes in Hades, being in torments, he sees Abraham from afar and Lazarus by his bosom.
Luke. And having cried out, he said, Father Abraham, be merciful to me,  send Lazarus, so that he may dip the tip of his finger in water,  cool my tongue, because I am in agony in this flame.
Luke. But Abraham said, Child, remember that thou in thy lifetime received thy good things,  likewise Lazarus evil things. But now here he is comforted and thou are in agony.
Luke. And besides all these things, between us and you a great chasm is fixed, so that those here who want to cross over to you are not able, nor may those go across from there to us.
Luke. And he said, I beg thee therefore, father, that thou would send him to my father's house,
Luke. for I have five brothers, that he may testify to them, lest they also come into this place of torment.
Luke. But Abraham says to him, They have Moses and the prophets. Let them hear them.
Luke. And he said, No, father Abraham,  if some man would go to them from the dead they will repent.
Luke. And he said to him, If they do not listen to Moses and the prophets, neither will they be persuaded if some man would rise from the dead.
Luke. And he said to his disciples, It is impossible for the stumbling-blocks not to come,  woe to him through whom they come!
Luke. It is better for him if a donkey-powered millstone were hanged about his neck,  he were thrown into the sea, than that he should cause one of these little ones to stumble.
Luke. Take heed to yourselves. And if thy brother should sin against thee, rebuke him,  if he repents, forgive him.
Luke. And if he should sin against thee seven times in the day,  seven times in the day turn back, saying, I repent, thou will forgive him.
Luke. And the apostles said to the Lord, Increase faith for us.
Luke. And the Lord said, If ye have faith as a grain of mustard plant, ye would say to this sycamine tree, Be thou uprooted and be planted in the sea,  it would have obeyed you.
Luke. But which of you having a bondman plowing or feeding livestock, who, when he comes in from the field, will straightaway say, After coming near, sit down?
Luke. Will he not rather say to him, Prepare what I may dine,  having gird thyself, serve me until I eat and drink,  after these things thou will eat and drink?
Luke. Does he have a favor for that bondman because he did the things that were commanded? I think not.
Luke. Thus ye also, when ye did all the things that were commanded you, say, We are unprofitable bondmen, because we have done what we are obligated to do.
Luke. And it came to pass as he went to Jerusalem, that he was passing through the middle of Samaria and Galilee.
Luke. And as he entered into a certain village, ten leprous men who stood from afar met him.
Luke. And they raised a voice, saying, Jesus, Master, be merciful to us.
Luke. And when he saw them, he said to them, After departing, display yourselves to the priests. And it came to pass, during their going they were cleansed.
Luke. And one of them, when he saw that he was healed, turned back with a great voice glorifying God.
Luke. And he fell upon his face beside his feet giving him thanks. And he was a Samaritan.
Luke. And having answered, Jesus said, Were not the ten cleansed? But where are the nine?
Luke. Were there none found who returned to give glory to God, except this foreigner?
Luke. And he said to him, After rising, go. Thy faith has healed thee.
Luke. And questioned by the Pharisees when the kingdom of God comes, he answered them and said, The kingdom of God does not come with observation,
Luke. nor will they say, Lo, here! or, Lo, there! For behold, the kingdom of God is inside of you.
Luke. And he said to the disciples, The days will come when ye will long to see one of the days of the Son of man,  ye will not see it.
Luke. And they will say to you, Lo, here! Lo, there! Do not depart, nor pursue.
Luke. For just as the lightning, its flashing from under the sky to under the sky, illuminates, so will the Son of man be in his day.
Luke. But first it is necessary for him to suffer many things and be rejected from this generation.
Luke. And just as it happened in the days of Noah, so also it will be in the days of the Son of man.
Luke. They ate, they drank, they married, they were given in marriage, until the day that Noah entered into the ark,  the flood came and destroyed them all.
Luke. And likewise as it happened in the days of Lot. They ate, they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they built.
Luke. But in that day Lot went out from Sodom he rained fire and brimstone from the sky,  destroyed them all.
Luke. It will be according to these things in that day the Son of man is revealed.
Luke. In that day, he who will be on the housetop,  his vessels in the house, let him not go down to take them up. And let him who is in the field likewise not return for the things behind.
Luke. Remember Lot's wife.
Luke. Whoever will seek to save his life will lose it,  whoever will lose it will keep it alive.
Luke. I say to you, in that night there will be two in one bed. The one man will be taken,  the other man will be left.
Luke. Two will be grinding together. The one woman will be taken,  the other woman will be left.
Luke. This verse is not in the majority of the Greek manuscripts.
Luke. And having answered, they say to him, Where, Lord? And he said to them, Where the body is, there the vultures will be gathered together.
Luke. And he also spoke a parable to them about it being necessary to always pray,  not to give up,
Luke. saying, In a certain city there was a judge who did not fear God,  did not regard man.
Luke. And a widow was in that city,  she came to him, saying, Avenge me of my opponent.
Luke. And for a time he would not,  after these things he said within himself, Although I fear not God,  regard not man,
Luke. yet because this widow causes me a beating, I will avenge her, lest by no end of coming she give me a black eye.
Luke. And the Lord said, Hear ye what the unrighteous judge says.
Luke. And God, will he, no, not do the vengeance of his chosen who cry out to him day and night,  yet being patient toward them?
Luke. I say to you, that he will do their vengeance speedily. Nevertheless, when the Son of man comes, will he then find faith on the earth?
Luke. And he also spoke this parable to some of those who were persuaded in themselves that they were righteous,  disdained other men.
Luke. Two men went up into the temple to pray, the one a Pharisee,  the other a tax collector.
Luke. Having stood by himself, the Pharisee prayed these things: God, I thank thee that I am not as the rest of men, predatory, unjust, adulterers, or even as this tax collector.
Luke. I fast twice of the week. I tithe all things, as many as I acquire.
Luke. But the tax collector, having stood from afar, would not even lift his eyes to the sky,  beat upon his breast, saying, God, be thou merciful to me a sinful man.
Luke. I say to you, this man went down to his house justified rather than that man. Because every man who lifts himself up will be made lower,  he who makes himself lower will be lifted up.
Luke. And they were also bringing the infants to him, so that he would touch them,  when the disciples saw it, they rebuked them.
Luke. But having summoned them, Jesus said, Allow the children to come to me,  do not forbid them, for of such is the kingdom of God.
Luke. Truly I say to you, whoever will not receive the kingdom of God as a child, will, no, not enter into it.
Luke. And a certain ruler questioned him, saying, Good teacher, having done what, will I inherit eternal life?
Luke. And Jesus said to him, Why do thou call me good? None is good except one, God.
Luke. Thou know the commandments. Thou shall not commit adultery. Thou shall not murder. Thou shall not steal. Thou shall not give false testimony. Honor thy father and thy mother.
Luke. And he said, All these things I have kept from my youth.
Luke. And when he heard these things, Jesus said to him, Yet one thing is lacking from thee. Sell all things, as many as thou have,  distribute to the poor,  thou will have treasure in heaven. And come, follow me.
Luke. But when he heard these things, he became very sorrowful, for he was very rich.
Luke. And having seen him become very sorrowful, Jesus said, How difficultly those who have riches will enter into the kingdom of God.
Luke. For it is easier for a camel to enter in through the hole of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.
Luke. And those who heard it said, And who can be saved?
Luke. And he said, The things impossible with men are possible with God.
Luke. And Peter said, Lo, we have left all and followed thee.
Luke. And he said to them, Truly I say to you, that there is no man who has left house, or parents, or brothers, or wife, or children for the sake of the kingdom of God,
Luke. who will, no, not receive back manifold more in this time,  in the coming age eternal life.
Luke. And having taken along the twelve, he said to them, Behold, we are going up to Jerusalem,  all the things that are written through the prophets about the Son of man will be completed.
Luke. For he will be delivered up to the Gentiles,  he will be mocked and insulted and spit upon.
Luke. And after scourging, they will kill him,  the third day he will rise up.
Luke. And they understood none of these things,  this saying was hidden from them,  they did not understand the things that were said.
Luke. And it came to pass as he approached Jericho, a certain blind man sat beside the road begging.
Luke. And having heard a multitude going by, he inquired what this may be.
Luke. And they informed him that Jesus the Nazarene passes by.
Luke. And he cried out, saying, Jesus, thou son of David, be merciful to me.
Luke. And those who went ahead rebuked him, so that he would be quiet,  he cried out much more, Thou son of David, be merciful to me.
Luke. And having stood still, Jesus commanded him to be brought to him. And when he came near, he questioned him,
Luke. saying, What do thou that I would do to thee? And he said, Lord, that I may receive sight.
Luke. And Jesus said to him, Receive sight. Thy faith has healed thee.
Luke. And immediately he received sight,  followed him glorifying God. And all the people when they saw it gave praise to God.
Luke. And having entered, he was passing through Jericho.
Luke. And behold, a man called by name, Zacchaeus. And he was a chief tax collector,  this man was rich.
Luke. And he sought to see Jesus, who he was. And he was not able because of the crowd, because his stature was small.
Luke. And having ran ahead, he climbed up in a sycamore tree so that he might see him, because he was going to pass that one.
Luke. And when Jesus came to the place, having looked up, he saw him,  said to him, Zacchaeus, after making haste, come down, for today I must lodge at thy house.
Luke. And having made haste, he came down and received him, rejoicing.
Luke. And all who saw murmured, saying, He went in to relax with a sinful man.
Luke. And having stood, Zacchaeus said to the Lord, Behold, half of the things possessed by me, Lord, I give to the poor. And if I defrauded any man of anything, I repay fourfold.
Luke. And Jesus said to him, Today salvation has come to this house, forasmuch as he also is a son of Abraham.
Luke. For the Son of man came to seek and to save that which was lost.
Luke. And as they heard these things, he spoke, adding on a parable because he was near Jerusalem,  because they thought that the kingdom of God was going to appear immediately.
Luke. He said therefore, A certain nobleman went into a far country to receive for himself a kingdom,  to return.
Luke. And having called ten of his bondmen, he gave them ten minas and said to them, Do business until I come.
Luke. But his citizens hated him,  sent an embassy behind him, saying, We do not want this man to reign over us.
Luke. And it came to pass for him to return, having taken the kingdom. And he said for these bondmen to be called to him, to whom he gave the silver, so that he might know what any man gained by trading.
Luke. And the first came, saying, Lord, thy mina gained ten minas.
Luke. And he said to him, Well, thou good bondman. Because thou became faithful in the least, be thou having authority over ten cities.
Luke. And the second came, saying, Lord, thy mina gained five minas.
Luke. And he also said to him, And thou become over five cities.
Luke. And another came, saying, Lord, behold thy mina, which I had put away in a napkin.
Luke. For I was afraid of thee because thou are an austere man. Thou take up what thou did not lay down,  reap what thou did not sow.
Luke. He says to him, Out of thy mouth I will judge thee, thou evil bondman. Thou had known that I am an austere man taking up what I did not lay down,  reaping what I did not sow.
Luke. Then why did thou not give my silver into a bank,  having come I would have collected it with interest?
Luke. And he said to those who stood by, Take the mina from him,  give it to him who has the ten minas.
Luke. And they said to him, Lord, he has ten minas.
Luke. For I say to you, that to every man who has, will be given,  from him who has not, even what he has will be taken away from him.
Luke. Nevertheless those enemies of mine who did not want me to reign over them, bring here,  kill them before me.
Luke. And having spoke these things, he went ahead, going up to Jerusalem.
Luke. And it came to pass when he came near to Bethphage and Bethany, at the mount that is called Olives, he sent two of his disciples, saying,
Luke. Go ye into the opposite village, in which, having entered, ye will find a colt tied, on which no man ever sat. Having untied, bring it.
Luke. And if any man asks you, Why do ye untie it? Thus ye will say to him, The Lord has need of it.
Luke. And having departed, those who were sent found just as he said to them.
Luke. And as they were untying the colt, the masters of it said to them, Why do ye untie the colt?
Luke. And they said, The Lord has need of it.
Luke. And they brought it to Jesus. And having cast their garments upon the colt, they mounted Jesus.
Luke. And as he went, they spread their garments on the road.
Luke. And as he was now coming near, at the descent of the mount of Olives, the whole multitude of the disciples began rejoicing to praise God in a great voice about all the mighty works that they had seen, saying,
Luke. Blessed is the King who comes in the name of the Lord! Peace in heaven,  glory in the highest!
Luke. And some of the Pharisees from the multitude said to him, Teacher, rebuke thy disciples.
Luke. And having answered, he said to them, I tell you that if these were silent, the stones would cry out.
Luke. And when he came near, having seen the city, he wept over it,
Luke. saying, If thou knew, even thou, indeed even in this thy day, the things for thy peace. But now they are hidden from thine eyes.
Luke. Because the days will come upon thee,  thine enemies will build a barricade around thee,  will surround thee,  enclose thee on every side.
Luke. And they will raze thee and thy children within thee. And they will not leave in thee a stone upon a stone, because thou knew not the time of thy visitation.
Luke. And having entered into the temple, he began to cast out those selling and buying in it,
Luke. saying to them, It is written, My house is a house of prayer,  ye made it a den of robbers.
Luke. And he was teaching daily in the temple. But the chief priests,  the scholars sought to destroy him, even the foremost men of the people.
Luke. And they did not find what they might do, for the people all hung upon him, listening.
Luke. And it came to pass on one of those days, as he was teaching the people in the temple,  preaching the good news, the chief priests and the scholars with the elders stood near.
Luke. And they spoke, saying to him, Tell us, by what authority are thou doing these things? Or who is he who gave thee this authority?
Luke. And having answered, he said to them, I also will ask you one word,  ye tell me.
Luke. The immersion of John, was it from heaven or from men?
Luke. And they reasoned with themselves, saying, If we should say, From heaven, he will say, Why did ye not believe him?
Luke. But if we say, From men, all the people will stone us, for they are convinced John is a prophet.
Luke. And they replied not to know from where.
Luke. And Jesus said to them, Neither do I tell you by what authority I do these things.
Luke. And he began to speak this parable to the people. A man planted a vineyard,  leased it to farmers,  went abroad for a considerable time.
Luke. And at the season he sent a bondman to the farmers, so that they would give him from the fruit of the vineyard. But having beaten him, the farmers sent him away empty.
Luke. And he proceeded to send another bondman. And they, having beaten and shamefully treated, sent him also away empty.
Luke. And he proceeded to send a third. And they also having wounded this man, cast him out.
Luke. And the lord of the vineyard said, What shall I do? I will send my beloved son. Perhaps they will be made ashamed after seeing this man.
Luke. But when the farmers saw him, they deliberated among themselves, saying, This is the heir. Come, let us kill him, so that the inheritance may become ours.
Luke. And having cast him outside of the vineyard, they killed him. What therefore will the lord of the vineyard do to them?
Luke. He will come and destroy these farmers,  will give the vineyard to others. And having heard it, they said, May it not happen!
Luke. But having looked upon them, he said, What then is this that is written, The stone that those who build rejected, this became the head of the corner?
Luke. Every man who falls on that stone will be broken,  on whomever it may fall, it will grind him to dust.
Luke. And the chief priests and the scholars sought to throw hands on him in the same hour. And they were afraid, for they knew that he spoke this parable against them.
Luke. And having watched him, they sent forth insidious men pretending themselves to be righteous, so that they might take hold of his word, in order to deliver him up to the rule and to the authority of the governor.
Luke. And they questioned him, saying, Teacher, we know that thou speak and teach rightly,  thou do not accept a personage,  teach the way of God in truth,
Luke. Is it permitted for us to give tribute to Caesar or not?
Luke. But having perceived their craftiness, he said to them, Why do ye try me?
Luke. Display to me a denarius. Whose image and inscription has it? And having answered, they said, Caesar's.
Luke. And he said to them, Then render the things of Caesar to Caesar,  the things of God to God.
Luke. And they were unable to lay hold of his word before the people. And having marveled at his answer, they were silent.
Luke. And some of the Sadducees having approached, those who say there is no resurrection, they questioned him,
Luke. saying, Teacher, Moses wrote to us, if any brother dies, having a wife,  this man dies childless, that his brother should take his wife,  raise up seed to his brother.
Luke. There were therefore seven brothers. And the first having taken a wife, died childless.
Luke. And the second took the woman,  this man died childless.
Luke. And the third likewise took her,  likewise also the seven; they left behind no children,  died.
Luke. And last of all the woman also died.
Luke. In the resurrection therefore whose wife of them does she become? For the seven had her as wife.
Luke. And having answered, Jesus said to them, The sons of this age marry,  are given in marriage,
Luke. but those who are considered worthy to attain to that age,  the resurrection from the dead, neither marry, nor are given in marriage.
Luke. For neither can they die any more, for they are like the agents,  are sons of God, being sons of the resurrection.
Luke. But that the dead are raised, even Moses showed at the Bush when he calls the Lord, the God of Abraham,  the God of Isaac,  the God of Jacob.
Luke. Now he is not God of the dead,  of the living, for all live to him.
Luke. And some of the scholars having answered, they said, Teacher, thou said well.
Luke. For they no longer dared to question him anything.
Luke. And he said to them, How do they say the Christ is David's son?
Luke. Even David himself says in the book of Psalms, The Lord said to my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand,
Luke. until I will place thine enemies a footstool of thy feet.
Luke. David therefore calls him Lord,  how is he his son?
Luke. And while all the people were listening, he said to his disciples,
Luke. Beware of the scholars, who desire to walk around in long robes,  love greetings in the marketplaces,  chief seats in the synagogues,  places of honor at the feasts,
Luke. who devour widows' houses,  in pretence make long prayers. These will receive greater damnation.
Luke. And having looked up, he saw the rich casting their gifts into the treasury.
Luke. And he also saw a certain poor widow there casting in two mites.
Luke. And he said, Truly I say to you, that this poor widow cast in more than they all.
Luke. For all these cast into the offerings of God from their abundance,  this woman from her poverty cast in all the living that she had.
Luke. And as some spoke about the temple, that it was adorned with fine stones and gifts, he said,
Luke. These things that ye see, the days will come during which there will not be left a stone upon a stone that will not be thrown down.
Luke. And they questioned him, saying, Teacher, when therefore will these things be? And what is the sign when these things are going to happen?
Luke. And he said, Watch that ye may not be led astray, for many will come in my name, saying, I am, , The time has come near. Go ye not therefore after them.
Luke. And when ye may hear of wars and tumults, do not be alarmed, for these things must first happen,  the end is not straightaway.
Luke. Then he said to them, Nation will rise against nation,  kingdom against kingdom.
Luke. And great earthquakes will be in various places,  famines and plagues. And there will be fearful sights and great signs from the sky.
Luke. But before all these things, they will throw their hands on you,  will persecute you, delivering you up to the synagogues and prisons, being brought before kings and rulers for my name's sake.
Luke. But it will go out from you for testimony.
Luke. Settle therefore in your hearts not to premeditate to make defense.
Luke. For I will give you a mouth and wisdom that all those who oppose you will not be able to contradict or to resist.
Luke. And ye will be betrayed even by parents,  kinsmen,  friends,  brothers. And some of you they will condemn to death.
Luke. And ye will be hated by all men because of my name.
Luke. And, no, not a hair of your head will perish.
Luke. In your perseverance ye gain your souls.
Luke. But when ye see Jerusalem surrounded by armies, then know that the desolation of it has come near.
Luke. Then let those in Judea flee to the mountains,  let those in the midst of it depart out,  let not those in the rural areas enter into it.
Luke. Because these are days of vengeance to fulfill all things that are written.
Luke. But woe to those who have in the womb,  to those who suckle in those days. For there will be great distress upon the land,  wrath to this people.
Luke. And they will fall by the jaw of the sword,  will be led away captive into all the nations. And Jerusalem will be trampled down by the Gentiles until the times of the Gentiles are fulfilled.
Luke. And there will be signs in sun and moon and stars,  upon the earth distress of nations, with perplexity, roaring of sea and of tossing,
Luke. fainting of men from fear,  of anticipation of the things coming upon the world, for the powers of the heavens will be shaken.
Luke. And then they will see the Son of man coming in a cloud with power and much glory.
Luke. And when these things begin to happen, stand upright,  lift up your heads, because your redemption approaches.
Luke. And he spoke a parable to them. Behold the fig tree,  all the trees.
Luke. When they are now sprouting, ye know seeing for yourselves that summer is now near.
Luke. Even so ye, when ye see these things happening, know ye that the kingdom of God is near.
Luke. Truly I say to you, that this generation will, no, not pass away until all things happen.
Luke. The sky and the earth will pass away,  my words may, no, not pass away.
Luke. But take heed to yourselves, lest your hearts be weighed down in debauchery and drunkenness and mundane cares,  that day come upon you sudden.
Luke. For it will come like a trap upon all those who sit upon the face of all the earth.
Luke. Watch ye therefore, making supplication at all times, so that ye may be considered worthy to escape all these things going to happen,  to stand before the Son of man.
Luke. And during the days he was teaching in the temple,  going forth the nights, he lodged on the mount that is called Olives.
Luke. And all the people rose early in the morning to him in the temple to hear him.
Luke. Now the feast of unleavened bread was coming near, which is called Passover.
Luke. And the chief priests and the scholars sought how they might kill him, for they feared the people.
Luke. And Satan entered into Judas who was called Iscariot, being of the number of the twelve.
Luke. And having departed, he conversed with the chief priests and captains, how he might betray him to them.
Luke. And they were glad,  agreed together to give him silver.
Luke. And he consented and sought opportunity to betray him to them apart from the multitude.
Luke. And the day of unleavened bread came during which it was necessary to kill the Passover.
Luke. And he sent Peter and John, saying, After departing, prepare the Passover for us, that we may eat.
Luke. And they said to him, Where do thou want that we should prepare?
Luke. And he said to them, Behold, having entered into the city, a man will meet you carrying a pitcher of water. Follow him into the house where he enters.
Luke. And ye shall say to the house-ruler, The teacher says to thee, Where is the guest room where I may eat the Passover with my disciples?
Luke. And he will show you a large upper room furnished. Prepare there.
Luke. And having gone, they found just as he said to them,  they prepared the Passover.
Luke. And when the hour came, he sat down,  the twelve apostles with him.
Luke. And he said to them, With desire I have desired to eat this Passover with you before my suffering.
Luke. For I say to you, that I will eat of it no more, no, not till when it is fulfilled in the kingdom of God.
Luke. And having taken a cup, having expressed thanks, he said, Take this,  divide it among yourselves.
Luke. For I say to you, that I will, no, not drink from the fruit of the grapevine till when the kingdom of God comes.
Luke. And after taking bread, having expressed thanks, he broke in pieces,  gave to them, saying, This is my body that is given for you. Do ye this in my memory.
Luke. Likewise also the cup after dining, saying, This cup is the new covenant in my blood being shed for you.
Luke. Nevertheless behold, the hand of the man who betrays me is with me on the table.
Luke. And the Son of man indeed goes according to that which has been determined, nevertheless woe to that man through whom he is betrayed!
Luke. And they began to question among themselves who then of them would be going do this thing.
Luke. And also a dispute develop among them, which of them is considered to be greater.
Luke. And he said to them, The kings of the Gentiles have dominion over them,  those who exercise authority over them are called Benefactors.
Luke. But ye are not this way. Rather, the greater among you, shall become as the newer,  he who leads, as he who serves.
Luke. For who ranks higher, he who sits dining, or he who serves? Is it not he who sits dining? But I am in the midst of you as he who serves.
Luke. But ye are those who have continued with me in my trials.
Luke. And I appoint to you, just as my Father appointed to me a kingdom,
Luke. that ye may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom,  sit on thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel.
Luke. And the Lord said, Simon, Simon, behold, Satan demanded to have you to sift you as wheat,
Luke. but I prayed for thee, so that thy faith may not fail. And thou, when thou have returned, strengthen thy brothers.
Luke. And he said to him, Lord, I am ready to go with thee both to prison and to death.
Luke. And he said, I say to thee, Peter, a cock will, no, not sound today, before thou will thrice deny that thou know me.
Luke. And he said to them, When I sent you without bag and pouch and shoes, did ye lack anything? And they said, Nothing.
Luke. Then he said to them, But now, he who has a bag, let him take it,  likewise a pouch. And he who has no sword, let him sell his cloak and buy.
Luke. For I say to you, that this that is written is still necessary to be completed in me, And he was counted with lawless men, for these things about me also have fulfillment.
Luke. And they said, Lord, behold, here are two swords. And he said to them, It is enough.
Luke. And having come out, he proceeded according to his habit to the mount of Olives,  his disciples also followed him.
Luke. And when he came at the place, he said to them, Pray ye not to enter into temptation.
Luke. And he was withdrawn from them about a stone's throw. And he knelt down and prayed,
Luke. saying, Father, if thou want, remove this cup from me. Nevertheless not my will,  thine be done.
Luke. And an agent from heaven appeared to him, strengthening him.
Luke. And having become in agony he prayed more intensely,  his sweat became like drops of blood falling down to the ground.
Luke. And after rising up from his prayer, having come to the disciples, he found them sleeping from sorrow.
Luke. And said to them, Why sleep ye? Having risen, pray that ye may not enter into temptation.
Luke. While he yet spoke, behold, a multitude,  the man called Judas, one of the twelve, went before them. And he came near to Jesus to kiss him.
Luke. But Jesus said to him, Judas, thou betray the Son of man with a kiss?
Luke. And when those who were around him saw what would be, they said, Lord, shall we strike with the sword?
Luke. And a certain one of them struck the bondman of the high priest,  cut off his right ear.
Luke. But having answered, Jesus said, Allow ye as far as this. And having touched his ear, he healed him.
Luke. And Jesus said to the chief priests,  captains of the temple,  elders, who came to him, Have ye come out, as against a robber, with swords and clubs?
Luke. When I was with you daily in the temple, ye did not stretch forth hands against me. But this is your hour,  the power of darkness.
Luke. And having seized him, they led him,  brought him into the high priest's house. But Peter followed from afar.
Luke. And having kindled a fire in the midst of the court,  having sat down together, Peter sat in the midst of them.
Luke. But a certain servant girl having seen him sitting near the light,  having looked intently upon him, she said, This man was also with him.
Luke. But he denied him, saying, Woman, I do not know him.
Luke. And after a little while, another man having see him, said, Thou also are from them. And Peter said, Man, I am not.
Luke. And about one hour having passed, some other man insisted, saying, In truth this man was also with him, for he is also a Galilean.
Luke. And Peter said, Man, I do not know what thou are saying. And immediately, while he still spoke, a cock sounded.
Luke. And having turned, the Lord looked on Peter. And Peter remembered the word of the Lord, how he said to him, Before a cock sounds thou will deny me thrice.
Luke. And having gone outside, Peter wept bitterly.
Luke. And the men who held Jesus mocked him, while striking him.
Luke. And having covered him, they struck his face,  demanded him, saying, Prophesy! Who is he who struck thee?
Luke. And they spoke many other things against him, railing against him.
Luke. And when it became day, the eldership of the people, the chief priests,  the scholars, came together,  led him into their council, saying,
Luke. If thou are the Christ, tell us. And he said to them, If I tell you, ye will not believe,
Luke. and if I also ask, ye will, no, not answer nor release.
Luke. From henceforth the Son of man will be sitting at the right hand of the power of God.
Luke. And they all said, Therefore thou are the Son of God? And he said to them, Ye say that I am.
Luke. And they said, What further need have we of testimony? For we have heard from his mouth.
Luke. And having risen, the whole company of them led him to Pilate.
Luke. And they began to accuse him, saying, We found this man perverting the nation,  forbidding to give tribute to Caesar, saying himself to be Christ, a king.
Luke. And Pilate questioned him, saying, Are thou the king of the Jews? And having answered him, he said, Thou say.
Luke. And Pilate said to the chief priests and the multitudes, I find nothing guilty in this man.
Luke. But they were emphatic, saying, He stirs up the people, teaching throughout all Judea, having begun from Galilee as far as here.
Luke. And when Pilate heard Galilee, he questioned if the man is a Galilean.
Luke. And when he perceived that he is from Herod's jurisdiction, he sent him to Herod, who was himself also in Jerusalem in these days.
Luke. Now when Herod saw Jesus, he was exceedingly glad, for he was wanting of a considerable time to see him, because of hearing many things about him,  he hoped to see some sign happening by him.
Luke. And he interrogated him in considerable words,  he answered him nothing.
Luke. And the chief priests and the scholars had stood, vehemently accusing him.
Luke. But Herod having disdained him with his soldiers,  having mocked him, having arraying him in a bright robe, he sent him back to Pilate.
Luke. And both Pilate and Herod became friends with each other on the same day, for they were formerly being at enmity toward themselves.
Luke. And Pilate having called together the chief priests,  the rulers,  the people,
Luke. said to them, Ye brought this man to me as turning away the people. And behold, I, having examined him before you, found nothing guilty in this man of what ye accuse against him.
Luke. But not even Herod, for I sent you back to him,  lo, nothing having been done by him is worthy of death.
Luke. Therefore, having scourged I will release him.
Luke. Now he had need to release one man to them at every feast.
Luke. But they cried out all together, saying, Take away this man,  release to us Barabbas
Luke. (a man who was cast into prison because of a certain insurrection that occurred in the city,  for murder).
Luke. Again therefore Pilate called out wanting to release Jesus,
Luke. but they shouted, saying, Crucify, crucify him.
Luke. And he said to them a third time, For what evil did this man do? I have found nothing guilty of death in him. I will therefore, having scourged, release him.
Luke. But they were relentless with loud voices demanding him to be crucified. And their voices and those of the chief priests prevailed.
Luke. And Pilate decreed their request to happen.
Luke. And he released the man who had been cast into prison because of insurrection and murder, whom they asked for,  he delivered Jesus to their will.
Luke. And when they led him away, having taken hold of a certain Simon, a Cyrenian coming from the countryside, they laid the cross on him to bring behind Jesus.
Luke. And a great multitude of the people followed him,  also of women who bewailed and lamented him.
Luke. But having turning to them, Jesus said, Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, instead weep for yourselves and for your children.
Luke. Because, behold, the days are coming, during which they will say, Blessed are the barren,  the bellies that gave no birth,  the breasts that did not suckle.
Luke. Then they will begin to say to the mountains, Fall on us,  to the hills, Cover us.
Luke. Because if they do these things in the green tree, what will happen in the dry?
Luke. And two other men, malefactors, were also led with him to be executed.
Luke. And when they came to the place called Skull, there they crucified him,  the malefactors, one at the right hand and the other at the left.
Luke. And Jesus said, Father, forgive them, for they know not what they are doing. And dividing his garments, they cast a lot.
Luke. And the people had stood watching. And also the rulers with them sneered, saying, He saved others. He should save himself, if this is the Christ, the chosen of God.
Luke. And the soldiers also mocked him, approaching,  bringing him vinegar,
Luke. and saying, If thou are the king of the Jews, save thyself.
Luke. And there was also an inscription over him written in letters, in Greek and Latin and Hebrew: THIS IS THE KING OF THE JEWS.
Luke. And one of the malefactors who were hanged railed him, saying, If thou are the Christ, save thyself and us.
Luke. But the other man having answered, rebuking him, saying, Thou fear not even God, since thou are in the same condemnation?
Luke. And we indeed justly, for we receive worthy of what we did,  this man did nothing amiss.
Luke. And he said to Jesus, Remember me, Lord, when thou come into thy kingdom.
Luke. And Jesus said to him, Truly I say to thee, today thou will be with me in the paradise.
Luke. And it was about the sixth hour,  darkness occurred over the whole land until the ninth hour.
Luke. And the sun was darkened,  the curtain of the temple was torn in the middle.
Luke. And Jesus, having sounded out in a great voice, said, Father, into thy hands I entrust my spirit. And having said these things, he expired.
Luke. And when the centurion saw that which happened, he glorified God, saying, Certainly this man was righteous.
Luke. And all the multitudes who came together to this scene, watching that which happened, turned back, beating their breasts.
Luke. And all his acquaintances,  the women who accompanied him from Galilee, had stood from afar, seeing these things.
Luke. And behold a man named Joseph, a council member, being a good and righteous man
Luke. (this man not having consented to their purpose and deed), was from Arimathaea, a city of the Jews, who also himself awaited the kingdom of God.
Luke. This man having gone to Pilate, requested the body of Jesus.
Luke. And having taken it down, he wrapped it in linen,  laid it in a sepulcher cut in rock, of which no man was yet lain.
Luke. And the day was Preparation; sabbath was beginning.
Luke. And having followed closely, the women who were gathered to him out of Galilee, they saw the sepulcher,  how his body was laid.
Luke. And having returned, they prepared spices and ointments. And they indeed rested on the sabbath according to the commandment.
Luke. And on the first day of the week, very early morning, they came to the sepulcher bringing the spices that they prepared,  some women with them.
Luke. And they found the stone rolled away from the sepulcher.
Luke. And having entered in, they did not find the body of the Lord Jesus.
Luke. And it came to pass while they were bewildered about this, that behold, two men stood near them in shining apparel.
Luke. And since they became frightened and bowing down their face to the ground, they said to them, Why seek ye the living among the dead?
Luke. He is not here,  was raised. Remember how he spoke to you when he was still in Galilee,
Luke. saying that the Son of man must be delivered up into the hands of sinful men,  be crucified,  the third day to rise.
Luke. And they remembered his sayings.
Luke. And having returned from the sepulcher, they reported all these things to the eleven,  to all the others.
Luke. Now they were Mary Magdalene,  Joanna,  Mary the mother of James,  the other women with them who told these things to the apostles.
Luke. And their sayings appeared before them as idle talk,  they disbelieved them.
Luke. But having risen, Peter ran to the sepulcher. And having stooped down, he sees the linen cloths laying alone. And he departed, wondering to himself at that which happened.
Luke. And behold, two of them were going the same day to a village that was sixty furlongs away from Jerusalem, which name was Emmaus.
Luke. And they conversed with each other about all these things that happened.
Luke. And it came to pass, while they conversed and discussed, that Jesus himself also having approached, went along with them.
Luke. But their eyes were held, not to recognize him.
Luke. And he said to them, What are these words that ye toss back to each other, while walking and are looking sad.
Luke. And one, whose name was Cleopas, having answered, said to him, Thou only visit Jerusalem and do not know the things that happened in it during these days?
Luke. And he said to them, What? And they said to him, The things about Jesus the Nazarene, who became a prophet, a mighty man in work and word before God and all the people,
Luke. and how our chief priests and rulers delivered him up for condemnation of death,  crucified him.
Luke. But we hoped that he is the man who is going to redeem Israel. But even with all these things, it brings this third day today from which time these things happened.
Luke. But also some of our women astonished us, having come to be at the sepulcher early morning.
Luke. And not having found his body, they came, saying also to have seen a vision of agents who say he is alive.
Luke. And some of those with us went to the sepulcher,  found it this way, just as also the women said,  they did not see him.
Luke. And he said to them, O foolish men,  slow of heart to believe in all that the prophets spoke.
Luke. Was it not necessary for the Christ to suffer these things,  to enter into his glory?
Luke. And having begun from Moses and from all the prophets, he expounded to them in all the scriptures the things about himself.
Luke. And they came near to the village where they were going,  he pretended to go further.
Luke. And they constrained him, saying, Remain with us, because it is toward evening,  the day has declined. And he went in to remain with them.
Luke. And it came to pass during his dining with them, that, having taken the bread, he blessed,  having broken in pieces he gave to them.
Luke. And their eyes were opened,  they recognized him. And he became invisible from them.
Luke. And they said to each other, Was not our heart burning within us while he spoke to us on the way, while he opened to us the scriptures?
Luke. And having risen up the same hour, they returned to Jerusalem. And they found the eleven gathered together,
Luke. and those who were with them who said, The Lord really was raised,  was seen by Simon.
Luke. And they reported the things on the road,  how he was made known to them during the breaking of the bread.
Luke. And as they spoke these things, Jesus himself stood in the midst of them,  says to them, Peace to you.
Luke. But having been startled,  having become frightened, they presumed to see a spirit.
Luke. And he said to them, Why are ye troubled,  why do thoughts arise in your hearts?
Luke. See my hands and my feet, that it is I myself. Handle me and see, because a spirit does not have flesh and bones, as ye see me having.
Luke. And having said this, he displayed to them his hands and feet.
Luke. And while they still disbelieved from joy and wondering, he said to them, Have ye anything to eat here?
Luke. And they gave him a piece of a broiled fish and from a bees honeycomb.
Luke. And having taken it, he ate before them.
Luke. And he said to them, These are the words that I spoke to you while still being with you, that it is necessary for all things that are written in the law of Moses,  the prophets,  the psalms about me to be fulfilled.
Luke. Then he opened their mind to understand the scriptures.
Luke. And he said to them, Thus it is written,  thus it was necessary for the Christ to suffer,  to rise from the dead the third day,
Luke. and to proclaim in his name repentance and remission of sins for all the nations, having begun from Jerusalem.
Luke. And ye are witnesses of these things.
Luke. And behold, I send forth the promise of my Father upon you. But stay ye in the city until ye are clothed with power from on high.
Luke. And he led them outside as far as to Bethany,  having lifted up his hands, he blessed them.
Luke. And it came to pass while he blessed them, he parted from them,  was brought up into heaven.
Luke. And having worshiping him, they returned to Jerusalem with great joy,
Luke. and they were continually in the temple, praising and blessing God. Truly.
John
John. In the beginning was the Word,  the Word was with God,  the Word was God.
John. This man was in the beginning with God.
John. All things came to be through him,  apart from him not even one thing came to be that has come to be.
John. In him was life,  the life was the light of men.
John. And the light shines in the darkness,  the darkness did not comprehend it.
John. A man came to be who was sent from God, his name was John.
John. This man came for testimony so that he might testify about the light, so that all might believe through him.
John. That man was not the light,  that he might testify about the light.
John. He was the true light coming into the world that enlightens every man.
John. He was in the world,  the world came to be through him,  the world knew him not.
John. He came to his own,  his own did not accept him.
John. But as many as did accept him, to them he gave power to become children of God, to those who believe in his name,
John. who were begotten, not from blood, nor from a will of flesh, nor from a will of man,  from God.
John. And the Word became flesh,  dwelt among us. And we beheld his glory, glory as of the only begotten from the Father, full of grace and truth.
John. John testified about him,  cried out, saying, This was he of whom I said, He who comes after me came to be before me, because he was before me.
John. And from his fullness we all received, even grace for grace.
John. Because the law was given through Moses. Grace and truth came to be through Jesus Christ.
John. No man has ever seen God. The only begotten Son, being in the bosom of the Father, that man reported him.
John. And this is the testimony of John when the Jews sent forth priests and Levites from Jerusalem so that they might ask him, Who are thou?
John. And he confessed,  did not deny,  confessed, I am not the Christ.
John. And they asked him, What therefore, are thou Elijah? And he says, I am not. Are thou the prophet? And he answered, No.
John. They said therefore to him, Who are thou, so that we may give an answer to those who sent us? What do thou say about thyself?
John. He said, I am the voice of a man crying out in the wilderness: Make straight the way of the Lord, just as the prophet Isaiah said.
John. And those who were sent were from the Pharisees.
John. And they asked him,  said to him, Why therefore do thou immerse if thou are not the Christ nor Elijah nor the prophet?
John. John answered them, saying, I immerse in water,  amidst you stands him whom ye know not.
John. He is the man who comes after me, who has become before me, of whom I am not worthy that I might loosen the strap of his shoe.
John. These things occurred in Bethany beyond the Jordan where John was immersing.
John. On the morrow John sees Jesus coming to him,  he says, Behold, the Lamb of God who takes away the sin of the world!
John. This is he about whom I said, After me comes a man who has become before me, because he was before me.
John. And I had not known him,  that he would be made known to Israel. Because of this I came immersing in water.
John. And John testified, saying, I have seen the Spirit descending like a dove out of heaven,  it remained upon him.
John. And I had not known him. But he who sent me to immerse in water, he said to me, Upon whomever thou will see the Spirit descending and remaining on him, this is he who immerses in the Holy Spirit.
John. And I have seen and have testified that this is the Son of God.
John. Again on the morrow John stood,  two of his disciples.
John. And having looked upon Jesus walking, he says, Behold, the Lamb of God!
John. And the two disciples heard him speaking,  they followed Jesus.
John. And Jesus having turned,  having seen them following, says to them, What seek ye? And they said to him, Rabbi (which says, being interpreted, Teacher), where do thou dwell?
John. He says to them, Come and see. They came and saw where he dwelt,  remained with him that day. It was about the tenth hour.
John. Andrew, Simon Peter's brother, was one of the two who heard from John and who followed him.
John. This man first finds his own brother Simon,  says to him, We have found the Messiah (which is, being interpreted, Christ).
John. And he brought him to Jesus. And having seen him, Jesus said, Thou are Simon the son of Jonah. Thou will be called Cephas (which is interpreted, Peter).
John. On the morrow he wanted to go forth into Galilee,  he finds Philip. And Jesus says to him, Follow me.
John. Now Philip was from Bethsaida, of the city of Andrew and Peter.
John. Philip finds Nathanael,  says to him, We have found him of whom Moses in the law,  the prophets wrote: Jesus the son of Joseph of Nazareth.
John. And Nathanael said to him, What good can be from Nazareth? Philip says to him, Come and see.
John. Jesus saw Nathanael coming to him,  says about him, Behold, an Israelite indeed, in whom is no deceit.
John. Nathanael says to him, How do thou know me? Jesus answered and said to him, Before Philip called thee, being under the fig tree, I saw thee.
John. Nathanael answered,  says to him, Rabbi, thou are the Son of God. Thou are the king of Israel.
John. Jesus answered and said to him, Because I said to thee, I saw thee under the fig tree, thou believe? Thou will see greater than these things.
John. And he says to him, Truly, truly, I say to you, henceforth ye will see the heaven opened,  the agents of God ascending and descending upon the Son of man.
John. And the third day a wedding occurred in Cana of Galilee,  the mother of Jesus was there.
John. And Jesus also was invited,  his disciples, to the wedding.
John. And having lacked wine the mother of Jesus says to him, They have no wine.
John. And Jesus says to her, What is with me and with thee, woman? My hour is not yet here.
John. His mother says to the helpers, Whatever he may say to you, do.
John. Now there were six stone water pots laying there in accordance with the purification of the Jews, containing two or three measures each.
John. Jesus says to them, Fill the water pots with water. And they filled them until over.
John. And he says to them, Draw out now,  carry to the feast-ruler. And they carried.
John. And when the feast-ruler tasted the water that became wine,  had not known from where it was (but the helpers who drew the water had known), the feast-ruler called the bridegroom,
John. and says to him, Every man sets out the good wine first,  when they drank much, then the lesser. Thou have kept the good wine until now.
John. This is the beginning of the signs Jesus did in Cana of Galilee,  he manifested his glory. And his disciples believed in him.
John. After this he went down to Capernaum, he and his mother and his brothers and his disciples. And they remained there not many days.
John. And the Passover of the Jews was near,  Jesus went up to Jerusalem.
John. And he found sitting in the temple those who sell oxen and sheep and doves,  the moneychangers.
John. And having made a whip from cords, he drove all out from the temple, both the sheep and the oxen. And he poured out the coins of the moneychangers,  turned over their tables.
John. And he said to those who sell the doves, Take these things from here. Make not my Father's house a house of merchandise.
John. And his disciples remembered that it is written, Zeal for thy house will consume me.
John. The Jews therefore answered,  said to him, What sign do thou show us since thou do these things?
John. Jesus answered and said to them, Destroy this temple,  in three days I will raise it up.
John. The Jews therefore said, This temple was forty-six years being built,  will thou raise it up in three days?
John. But that man spoke about the temple of his body.
John. When therefore he was raised from the dead his disciples remembered that he spoke this,  they believed the scripture and the word that Jesus said.
John. Now when he was in Jerusalem at the Passover during the feast, many believed in his name seeing his signs that he did.
John. But Jesus did not trust himself to them, because he knew all men,
John. and because he had no need that any man should testify about man, for he himself knew what was in man.
John. Now there was a man of the Pharisees named Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews.
John. This man came to him by night,  said to him, Rabbi, we know that thou have come a teacher from God, for no man can do these signs that thou do if God is not with him.
John. Jesus answered and said to him, Truly, truly, I say to thee, If any man is not begotten from above, he cannot see the kingdom of God.
John. Nicodemus says to him, How can a man be begotten, being old? Can he enter a second time into his mother's belly,  be born?
John. Jesus answered, Truly, truly, I say to thee, If any man is not begotten from water and Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.
John. That which is begotten from the flesh is flesh,  that which is begotten from the Spirit is spirit.
John. Marvel not that I said to thee, ye must be begotten from above.
John. The wind blows where it will,  thou hear the sound of it,  know not from where it comes,  where it goes. So is every man who is begotten from the Spirit.
John. Nicodemus answered and said to him, How can these things happen?
John. Jesus answered and said to him, Thou are the teacher of Israel,  do not understand these things?
John. Truly, truly, I say to thee, we speak that which we know,  testify of what we have seen,  ye do not accept our testimony.
John. If I told you earthly things,  ye do not believe, how will ye believe if I should tell you heavenly things?
John. And no man has ascended into heaven, except he who came down out of heaven: the Son of man who is in heaven.
John. And just as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, so must the Son of man be lifted up,
John. so that every man who believes in him would not perish,  may have eternal life.
John. For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, so that every man who believes in him would not perish,  have eternal life.
John. For God sent the Son into the world not that he might condemn the world,  that the world might be saved through him.
John. He who believes in him is not condemned. He who does not believe has been condemned already, because he has not believed in the name of the only begotten Son of God.
John. And this is the condemnation, that the light has come into the world,  men loved the darkness rather than the light, for their deeds were evil.
John. For every man who does evil hates the light,  does not come to the light, so that his works may not be exposed.
John. But he who does the truth comes to the light, so that his deeds may be made manifest that they are wrought in God.
John. After these things Jesus and his disciples came into the Judean country. And he remained there with them and immersed.
John. And John also was immersing in Aenon near Salim because there was much water there. And they came and were immersed.
John. For John was not yet cast into prison.
John. Therefore a debate developed from John's disciples with the Jews about purification.
John. And they came to John,  said to him, Rabbi, he who was with thee beyond the Jordan, about whom thou have testified, behold, this man immerses,  all men come to him.
John. John answered and said, A man can receive nothing unless it is given to him from heaven.
John. Ye yourselves testify that I said, I am not the Christ,  that I am sent ahead of that man.
John. He who has the bride is the bridegroom. But the friend of the bridegroom, who stands and hears him, rejoices with joy because of the bridegroom's voice. This therefore my joy is fulfilled.
John. It is necessary for that man to increase,  me to decrease.
John. He who comes from above is above all things. He who is of the earth is of the earth,  speaks of the earth. He who comes from heaven is above all things.
John. And what he has seen and heard, of this he testifies,  no man receives his testimony.
John. He who has received his testimony has set a seal that God is true.
John. For he whom God sent speaks the sayings of God, for God does not give the Spirit by measure.
John. The Father loves the Son,  has given all things into his hand.
John. He who believes in the Son has eternal life,  he who disobeys the Son will not see life,  the wrath of God remains on him.
John. When therefore the Lord knew that the Pharisees had heard that Jesus was making and immersing more disciples than John
John. (although Jesus himself did not immerse,  his disciples),
John. he left Judea,  departed into Galilee.
John. And it was necessary for him to pass through Samaria.
John. So he comes to a city of Samaria, called Sychar, near the place that Jacob gave to his son Joseph.
John. And Jacob's well was there. Jesus therefore being wearied from the journey, thus was sitting on the well. It was about the sixth hour.
John. A woman of Samaria comes to draw water. Jesus says to her, Give me to drink.
John. For his disciples had gone away into the city so that they might buy food.
John. The Samaritan woman therefore says to him, How do thou, being Jewish, ask to drink from me, being a Samaritan woman, for Jews do not associate with Samaritans?
John. Jesus answered and said to her, If thou had known the gift of God,  who it is who says to thee, Give me to drink, thou would have asked him,  he would have given thee living water.
John. The woman says to him, Sir, thou have not even a container,  the well is deep. From where then have thou the living water?
John. Are thou greater than our father Jacob who gave us the well,  drank from it himself,  his sons,  his livestock?
John. Jesus answered and said to her, Every man who drinks of this water will thirst again,
John. but whoever drinks of the water that I will give him will, no, not thirst into the age. But the water that I will give him will become in him a well of water springing up to eternal life.
John. The woman says to him, Give me this water, sir, that I may not thirst, nor come here to draw out.
John. Jesus says to her, Go, call thy husband,  come here.
John. The woman answered and said to him, I have no husband. Jesus says to her, Thou said correctly, I have no husband.
John. For thou have had five husbands,  he whom thou now have is not thy husband. This thou have said true.
John. The woman says to him, Sir, I perceive that thou are a prophet.
John. Our fathers worshiped on this mountain,  ye say that in Jerusalem is the place where it is necessary to worship.
John. Jesus says to her, Woman, believe me, that the hour is coming when neither on this mountain, nor in Jerusalem will ye worship the Father.
John. Ye worship what ye do not know. We worship what we know, because salvation is from the Jews.
John. But an hour comes,  now is, when the true worshipers will worship the Father in spirit and truth, for also the Father seeks such kind who worship him.
John. God is Spirit,  those who worship him must worship in spirit and truth.
John. The woman says to him, I know that Messiah comes, he who is called Christ. When that man comes he will declare all things to us.
John. Jesus says to her, I who speak to thee am the man.
John. And upon this his disciples came. And they marveled that he spoke with the woman, yet no man said, What seek thou? or, Why do thou speak with her?
John. The woman therefore left her water pot,  departed into the city,  says to the men,
John. Come, see a man who told me all, as many things as I did. Is not this the Christ?
John. They went out of the city,  came to him.
John. In the meanwhile the disciples asked him, saying, Rabbi, eat.
John. But he said to them, I have food to eat that ye know not.
John. The disciples therefore said to each other, Did any man bring him to eat?
John. Jesus says to them, My food is that I do the will of him who sent me,  may finish his work.
John. Do ye not say, There are still four months and the harvest comes? Behold, I say to you, lift up your eyes and see the fields, that they are already white for harvest.
John. And he who reaps receives a wage and gathers fruit for eternal life, so that both he who sows and he who reaps may rejoice together.
John. For in this the saying is true, One is who sows,  another who reaps.
John. I sent you to reap what ye have not labored. Others have labored,  ye have entered into their labor.
John. And many of the Samaritans from that city believed in him because of the word of the woman, who testified, He told me all, as many things as I did.
John. So when the Samaritans came to him they asked him to remain with them,  he remained there two days.
John. And many more believed because of his word.
John. And they said to the woman, We no longer believe because of thy speaking, for we have heard ourselves,  know that this really is the Savior of the world, the Christ.
John. And after the two days he departed from there and went into Galilee.
John. For Jesus himself testified that a prophet has no honor in his own fatherland.
John. So when he came into Galilee, the Galileans received him, having seen all the things that he did in Jerusalem at the feast, for they also went to the feast.
John. Jesus therefore came again to Cana of Galilee where he made the water wine. And there was a certain nobleman whose son was sick at Capernaum.
John. This man having heard that Jesus comes out of Judea into Galilee, he went to him and besought him that he would come down and heal his son, for he was going to die.
John. Jesus therefore said to him, Unless ye may see signs and wonders, ye will, no, not believe.
John. The nobleman says to him, Sir, come down before my child dies.
John. Jesus says to him, Go, thy son lives. And the man believed the word that Jesus said to him,  he departed.
John. And as he was now going down, his bondmen met him and reported, saying, Thy boy lives.
John. So he inquired of them the hour in which he fared well. And they said to him, Yesterday at the seventh hour the fever left him.
John. So the father knew that it was at that hour in which Jesus said to him, Thy son lives. And he himself believed and his whole house.
John. This again is a second sign that Jesus did, having come out of Judea into Galilee.
John. After these things there was a feast of the Jews,  Jesus went up to Jerusalem.
John. Now there is in Jerusalem by the place pertaining to sheep, a pool, which is called in Hebrew Bethesda, having five porches.
John. In these lay a great multitude of those who are feeble, blind, lame, withered, waiting for the movement of the water.
John. For an agent went down at a certain time into the pool,  agitated the water. Therefore the first man who stepped in after the agitation of the water became well from whatever affliction he had.
John. And a certain man was there who was thirty-eight years in the weakness.
John. When Jesus saw this man lying down,  knew that he fares now a long time, he says to him, Do thou desire to become well?
John. The infirmed man answered him, Sir, I have no man so that when the water is agitated he might put me into the pool,  while I am coming another steps down before me.
John. Jesus says to him, Arise, take up thy bed and walk.
John. And straightaway the man became well,  took up his bed and walked. Now it was sabbath on that day.
John. The Jews therefore said to the man who was cured, It is sabbath. It is not permitted for thee to take up the bed.
John. He answered them, The man who made me well, that man said to me, Take up thy bed and walk.
John. Therefore they asked him, Who is the man who said to thee, Take up thy bed and walk?
John. But the man who was healed had not known who he is, for Jesus withdrew, a multitude being in the place.
John. After these things Jesus finds him in the temple,  said to him, Behold, thou have become well. Sin no more, lest something worse may happen to thee.
John. The man departed and reported to the Jews that Jesus is the man who made him well.
John. And because of this the Jews persecuted Jesus,  sought to kill him, because he did these things on a sabbath.
John. But Jesus answered them, My Father works until now and I work.
John. Because of this therefore the Jews sought even more to kill him, because not only did he relax the sabbath,  also he called God his own Father, making himself equal to God.
John. Jesus therefore answered and said to them, Truly, truly, I say to you, the Son can do nothing of himself, except what he sees the Father doing. For whatever he may do, the Son also does these things in like manner.
John. For the Father loves the Son,  shows him all things that he himself does. And he will show him works greater than these, so that ye may marvel.
John. For as the Father raises up the dead and makes alive, so also the Son makes alive whom he will.
John. For neither does the Father judge any man,  he has given all judgment to the Son,
John. so that all would honor the Son, even as they honor the Father. The man not honoring the Son, does not honor the Father who sent him.
John. Truly, truly, I say to you, that he who hears my word,  believes him who sent me, has eternal life. And he does not come into condemnation,  has passed from death into life.
John. Truly, truly, I say to you, that an hour comes,  now is, when the dead will hear the voice of the Son of God,  those who hear will live.
John. For as the Father has life in himself, so also he gave to the Son to have life in himself.
John. And he also gave him authority to execute judgment because he is a son of man.
John. Marvel not at this, because an hour comes in which all those in the sepulchers will hear his voice,
John. and will come forth, those who have done right to a resurrection of life,  those who have practiced wrong to a resurrection of judgment.
John. I can from myself do nothing. As I hear, I judge. And my judgment is righteous because I seek not my will,  the will of the Father who sent me.
John. If I testify about myself, my witness is not valid.
John. There is another who testifies about me,  I know that the testimony that he testifies about me is valid.
John. Ye have sent to John,  he has testified to the truth.
John. But I do not take the testimony from man. However, I say these things, so that ye may be saved.
John. That man was the lamp that burns and shines,  ye were willing to rejoice for an hour in his light.
John. But I have testimony greater than of John, for the works that the Father has given me so that I might complete them, the same works that I do, they testify about me that the Father has sent me.
John. And the Father, he who sent me, has testified about me.Ye have neither heard his voice, nor have ever seen his appearance.
John. And ye have not his word dwelling in you, because ye do not believe that man whom he sent for this.
John. Ye search the scriptures, because ye think to have eternal life in them,  those are testifying about me.
John. And ye will not come to me, so that ye may have life.
John. I do not receive glory from men.
John. But I know you, that ye have not the love of God within yourselves.
John. I have come in my Father's name,  ye do not accept me. If another man should come in his own name, ye will accept that man.
John. How can ye believe, who receive glory from each other,  seek not the glory from the only God?
John. Think not that I will accuse you to the Father. The man who accuses you is Moses, in whom ye have hoped.
John. For if ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me, for that man wrote about me.
John. But if ye believe not the writings of that man, how will ye believe my sayings?
John. After these things Jesus went to the other side of the sea of Galilee of Tiberias.
John. And a great multitude followed him because they saw his signs, which he did on those who are infirmed.
John. And Jesus went up onto the mountain,  he sat there with his disciples.
John. Now the Passover, the feast of the Jews, was near.
John. Jesus therefore having lifted up his eyes,  having seen that a great multitude comes to him, he says to Philip, From where will we buy loaves, so that these may eat?
John. But he said this testing him, for he himself knew what he was going to do.
John. Philip answered him, Loaves of two hundred denarii of bread are not sufficient for them, so that each of them may take a little something.
John. One of his disciples, Andrew, Simon Peter's brother, says to him,
John. There is one child here that has five barley loaves and two fishes,  what are these for so many?
John. And Jesus said, Make the men sit down. Now there was much grass in the place. So the men sat down, in number about five thousand.
John. And Jesus took the loaves,  having expressed thanks, he distributed to the disciples,  the disciples to those who were sitting down, likewise also of the fishes as much as they wanted.
John. And when they were filled, he says to his disciples, Gather up the fragments that remain over, so that not anything may be lost.
John. So they gathered them up,  filled twelve baskets of fragments from the five barley loaves that remained over from those who have eaten.
John. When therefore the men saw what sign Jesus did, they said, This really is the prophet who comes into the world.
John. Jesus therefore having perceived that they are going to come and seize him, so that they might make him king, departed onto the mountain himself alone.
John. And when it became evening his disciples went down to the sea,
John. and having entered into the boat, they were going to the other side of the sea toward Capernaum. And it had already become dark,  Jesus had not come to them.
John. And the sea was being raised by a great wind blowing.
John. Therefore having impelled forward about twenty-five or thirty furlongs, they see Jesus walking on the sea,  coming near to the boat,  they were afraid.
John. But he says to them, It is I, fear not.
John. They were willing therefore to receive him into the boat,  straightaway the boat came to be at the land to which they were going.
John. On the morrow the multitude that stood on the other side of the sea, having seen that there was no other boat there except that one in which his disciples entered,  that Jesus did not go with his disciples into the boat,  his disciples went away alone,
John. and other boats came from Tiberias near the place where they ate the bread after the Lord expressed thanks,
John. when therefore the multitude saw that Jesus is not there, nor his disciples, they entered into the boats,  came to Capernaum seeking Jesus.
John. And when they found him on the other side of the sea, they said to him, Rabbi, when did thou become here?
John. Jesus answered them and said, Truly, truly, I say to you, ye seek me not because ye saw signs,  because ye ate of the loaves and were filled.
John. Work not for the food that perishes,  for the food that endures to eternal life, which the Son of man will give to you, for God the Father put a seal on this man.
John. They said to him therefore, What shall we do that we may work the works of God?
John. Jesus answered,  said to them, This is the work of God, that ye believe in that man whom he has sent.
John. They said to him therefore, What sign do thou, that we may see and believe in thee? What do thou work?
John. Our fathers ate the manna in the wilderness, just as it is written, He gave them bread out of heaven to eat.
John. Jesus therefore said to them, Truly, truly, I say to you, Moses did not give you the bread out of heaven,  my Father gives you the true bread out of heaven.
John. For the bread of God is he who comes down out of heaven,  gives life to the world.
John. They said to him therefore, Lord, always give us this bread.
John. Jesus said to them, I am the bread of life. He who comes to me will, no, not hunger,  he who believes in me will, no, not ever thirst.
John. But also I said to you, that ye have seen me,  yet do not believe.
John. All that the Father gives me will come to me,  he who comes to me I will, no, not cast out.
John. Because I have come down from heaven, not so that I might do my will,  the will of him who sent me.
John. And this is the will of the Father who sent me, that of all that he has given me I would not lose from it,  I will raise it up at the last day.
John. And this is the will of him who sent me, that every man who sees the Son,  believes in him, may have eternal life,  I will raise him up at the last day.
John. The Jews therefore murmured about him because he said, I am the bread that came down out of heaven.
John. And they said, Is this not Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we know? Therefore how does this man say, I have come down out of heaven?
John. Jesus therefore answered and said to them, Murmur not among each other.
John. No man can come to me unless the Father who sent me draws him,  I will raise him up in the last day.
John. It is written in the prophets, And they will all be taught of God. Every man who hears from the Father,  having learned, comes to me.
John. Not that any man has seen the Father, except he who is from God. This man has seen the Father.
John. Truly, truly, I say to you, he who believes in me has eternal life.
John. I am the bread of life.
John. Your fathers ate the manna in the wilderness,  they died.
John. This is the bread that comes down out of heaven, that a man may eat of it,  not die.
John. I am the living bread, having come down out of heaven. If any man eats of this bread, he will live into the age. And also, the bread that I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world.
John. The Jews therefore contended with each other, saying, How can this man give us his flesh to eat?
John. Jesus therefore said to them, Truly, truly, I say to you, unless ye eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink his blood, ye have no life in yourselves.
John. He who eats my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life,  I will raise him up at the last day.
John. For my flesh is truly food,  my blood is truly drink.
John. He who eats my flesh and drinks my blood dwells in me,  I in him.
John. Just as the living Father sent me,  I live because of the Father, also he who eats me, that man will also live because of me.
John. This is the bread that came down out of heaven, not as your fathers ate the manna and died. He who eats this bread will live into the age.
John. He said these things in a synagogue, as he taught in Capernaum.
John. Therefore many of his disciples having heard, said, This is a hard saying. Who can listen to it?
John. But Jesus, knowing in himself that his disciples are grumbling about this, said to them, Does this cause you to stumble?
John. Then if ye should see the Son of man ascending where he was before?
John. It is the spirit that makes alive. The flesh benefits nothing. The sayings that I speak to you are spirit, are life.
John. Nevertheless, there are some of you who do not believe. For Jesus had known from the beginning who they are who do not believe,  who he is who will betray him.
John. And he said, Because of this I have said to you that no man is able to come to me, if it is not given to him from my Father.
John. From this, many of his disciples went back at these things,  walked no more with him.
John. Jesus said therefore to the twelve, Do ye not also want to go?
John. Simon Peter therefore answered him, Lord, to whom will we go? Thou have sayings of eternal life.
John. And we have believed and know that thou are the Christ, the Son of the living God.
John. Jesus answered them, Did I not choose you the twelve,  one of you is a devil?
John. But he spoke of Judas Iscariot son of Simon. For this man, being one of the twelve, was going to betray him.
John. And after these things Jesus walked in Galilee, for he did not want to walk in Judea, because the Jews sought to kill him.
John. Now the feast of the Jews, the feast of tabernacles, was near.
John. His brothers therefore said to him, Depart from here,  go into Judea so that thy disciples also may see thy works that thou do.
John. For no man does anything in secret,  he himself seeks to be in public. If thou do these things, show thyself to the world.
John. For not even his brothers believed in him.
John. Jesus therefore says to them, My time is not yet here,  your time is always ready.
John. The world cannot hate you,  it hates me because I testify about it, that its works are evil.
John. Go ye up to this feast. I am not yet going to this feast, because my time is not yet fulfilled.
John. And having said these things to them, he remained in Galilee.
John. But when his brothers went up, then he also went up to the feast, not openly,  as in private.
John. The Jews therefore sought him at the feast,  said, Where is that man?
John. And there was much murmuring among the multitudes about him. Some said, He is a good man, others said, No,  he leads the multitude astray.
John. Yet no man spoke openly about him because of fear of the Jews.
John. And when it was now in the middle of the feast, Jesus went up into the temple and taught.
John. The Jews therefore marveled, saying, How does this man know scholarly material, not having learned?
John. Jesus therefore answered them and said, My doctrine is not mine,  his who sent me.
John. If any man wants to do his will, he will know about the doctrine, whether it is from God, or I speak from myself.
John. He who speaks from himself seeks his own glory,  he who seeks the glory of him who sent him, this man is true,  unrighteousness is not in him.
John. Did not Moses give you the law,  none of you does the law? Why do ye seek to kill me?
John. The multitude answered and said, Thou have a demon. Who seeks to kill thee?
John. Jesus answered and said to them, I did one work,  ye all marvel because of this.
John. Moses has given you circumcision (not that it is from Moses,  from the fathers),  ye circumcise a man on a sabbath.
John. If a man receives circumcision on a sabbath, so that the law of Moses may not be loosed, are ye angry with me because I made a man entirely well on a sabbath?
John. Judge not according to appearance,  judge righteous judgment.
John. Therefore some of the Jerusalemites said, Is not this he whom they seek to kill?
John. And lo, he speaks in public,  they say nothing to him. Perhaps the rulers really know that this really is the Christ?
John. However we know this man, where he is from,  when the Christ comes, no man knows where he is from.
John. Jesus therefore cried out in the temple, teaching and saying, Ye both know me,  know where I am from? And I have not come of myself,  he who sent me is true, whom ye know not.
John. I know him, because I am from him,  he sent me.
John. They sought therefore to seize him,  yet no man laid a hand on him because his hour had not yet come.
John. But many from the crowd believed in him,  they said, When the Christ comes, will he do more signs than these that this man did?
John. The Pharisees heard the crowd murmuring these things about him,  the Pharisees and the chief priests sent subordinates so that they might take him.
John. Jesus therefore said, Yet a little time I am with you,  then I go to him who sent me.
John. Ye will seek me,  will not find me,  where I am, ye cannot come.
John. The Jews therefore said among themselves, Where is this man going to go that we will not find him? Is he going to go to the Dispersion among the Greeks,  teach the Greeks?
John. What is this word that he said, Ye will seek me,  will not find me, , Where I am, ye cannot come?
John. Now on the last day, the great day of the feast, Jesus had stood and cried out, saying, If any man thirsts, let him come to me and drink.
John. He who believes in me, as the scripture has said, out of his belly will flow rivers of living water.
John. But he spoke this about the Spirit that those who believe in him were going to receive, for the Holy Spirit was not yet, because Jesus was not yet glorified.
John. Many from the multitude therefore, when they heard the saying, said, This is truly the prophet.
John. Others said, This is the Christ. Others said, For does the Christ come out of Galilee?
John. Has not the scripture said that the Christ comes of the seed of David,  from Bethlehem, the village where David was?
John. So there became a division among the multitude because of him.
John. And some of them wanted to take him,  no man laid hands on him.
John. The subordinates therefore came to the chief priests and Pharisees. And those men said to them, Why did ye not bring him?
John. The subordinates answered, A man never so spoke like this man.
John. The Pharisees therefore answered them, Have ye not also been led astray?
John. Have any of the rulers believed in him, or of the Pharisees?
John. But this multitude that does not know the law are accursed.
John. Nicodemus says to them (he who came to him by night, being one of them),
John. Does our law judge a man, unless it first may hear from himself and know what he does?
John. They answered and said to him, Are thou also from Galilee? Search and see, that out of Galilee arises no prophet.
John. And each man went to his house.
John. But Jesus went to the mount of Olives.
John. And at early morning he came again into the temple,  all the people came to him. And having sat down, he taught them.
John. And the scholars and the Pharisees bring to him a woman taken in adultery. And having stood her in the midst,
John. tempting, they say to him, Teacher, we found this woman committing adultery, in the act.
John. Now in the law, Moses commanded us such women are to be stoned. What therefore do thou say about her?
John. But they said this, trying him, so that they might have an accusation against him. But Jesus having stooped down, wrote on the ground with his finger, not pretending.
John. And when they continued asking him, after standing erect, he said to them, Let the innocent man of you first cast the stone at her.
John. And again having stooped down, he wrote on the ground.
John. And they, having heard and being convicted by their conscience, went out one by one, having begun from the elder until the last. And Jesus was left behind alone,  the woman being in the midst.
John. And Jesus, after standing erect,  having seen no man but the woman, he said to her, Woman, where are those accusers of thee? Did no man condemn thee?
John. And she said, No man, Lord. And Jesus said to her, Neither do I condemn thee. Go,  henceforth sin no more.
John. Again therefore Jesus spoke to them, saying, I am the light of the world. He who follows me would, no, not walk in the darkness,  will have the light of life.
John. The Pharisees therefore said to him, Thou testify about thyself. Thy testimony is not valid.
John. Jesus answered and said to them, Even if I might testify about myself, my testimony is valid, for I know where I came from and where I go,  ye do not know where I come from and where I go.
John. Ye judge according to the flesh. I judge no man.
John. But even if I judge, my judgment is valid, because I am not alone,  I and the Father who sent me.
John. And also it is written in your law that the testimony of two men is valid.
John. I am he who testifies about myself,  the Father who sent me testifies about me.
John. They said therefore to him, Where is thy Father? Jesus answered, Ye know neither me, nor my Father. If ye had known me, ye would have known my Father also.
John. Jesus spoke these sayings in the treasury as he taught in the temple,  no man seized him, because his hour had not yet come.
John. Jesus therefore again said to them, I go,  ye will seek me,  ye will die in your sin. Where I go, ye cannot come.
John. The Jews therefore said, Will he kill himself, because he says, Where I go, ye cannot come?
John. And he said to them, Ye are from below, I am from above. Ye are of this world, I am not of this world.
John. I said therefore to you that ye will die in your sins. For unless ye believe that I am he, ye will die in your sins.
John. They said therefore to him, Who are thou? And Jesus said to them, The beginning, something that I am even telling you.
John. I have many things to say and to judge about you. But he who sent me is true,  I speak to the world these things that I heard from him.
John. They did not understand that he spoke the Father to them.
John. Jesus therefore said to them, When ye have lifted up the Son of man, then ye will know that I am he,  I do nothing from myself,  I speak these things as my Father taught me.
John. And he who sent me is with me. The Father has not left me alone, because I always do things pleasing to him.
John. As he spoke these things of him, many believed in him.
John. Jesus therefore said to those Jews who believed him, If ye remain in my word, ye are truly my disciples,
John. and ye will know the truth,  the truth will make you free.
John. They answered to him, We are Abraham's seed,  have been in bondage to no man, ever. How can thou say, Ye will become free?
John. Jesus answered them, Truly, truly, I say to you, that every man who does the sin is a bondman of the sin.
John. And the bondman does not remain in the house into the age. The Son remains into the age.
John. If therefore the Son should make you free, ye will truly be free.
John. I know that ye are Abraham's seed, yet ye seek to kill me, because my word has no place in you.
John. I speak what I have seen from my Father,  ye therefore do what ye have seen from your father.
John. They answered and said to him, Abraham is our father. Jesus says to them, If ye were Abraham's children, ye would do the works of Abraham.
John. But now ye seek to kill me, a man who has told you the truth that I heard from God. Abraham did not do this.
John. Ye do the works of your father. They said therefore to him, We were not begotten from fornication. We have one Father, God.
John. Therefore Jesus said to them, If God were your Father, ye would love me, for I came forth and have come from God. For, neither have I come for myself,  he sent me.
John. Why do ye not understand my speech? Because ye cannot hear my word.
John. Ye are from the father, the devil,  ye want to do the desires of your father. He was a man-killer from the beginning,  he has not stood in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaks a lie, he speaks from his own, because he is a liar,  the father of it.
John. And I, because I speak the truth, ye do not believe me.
John. Which of you convicts me about sin? And if I speak truth, why do ye not believe me?
John. He who is of God hears the sayings of God. Because of this ye do not hear, because ye are not of God.
John. Therefore the Jews answered and said to him, Do we not say well that thou are a Samaritan,  have a demon?
John. Jesus answered, I have no demon,  I honor my Father,  ye dishonor me.
John. But I seek not my own glory. He is who seeks and judges.
John. Truly, truly, I say to you, if any man keeps my word, he will, no, not see death, into the age.
John. The Jews therefore said to him, Now we know that thou have a demon. Abraham died,  the prophets,  thou say, If any man keeps my word, he will, no, not taste of death, into the age.
John. Are thou greater than our father Abraham who died? And the prophets died. Who do thou make thyself?
John. Jesus answered, If I glorify myself, my glory is nothing. My Father is he who glorifies me, of whom ye say, He is our God.
John. And ye do not know him,  I know him. And if I should say that I do not know him, I will be a liar like you,  I do know him and keep his word.
John. Your father Abraham rejoiced that he could see my day,  he saw it,  was glad.
John. The Jews therefore said to him, Thou have not yet fifty years,  thou have seen Abraham?
John. Jesus said to them, Truly, truly, I say to you, before Abraham came to be, I am.
John. Therefore they took up stones so that they might throw at him,  Jesus was hid,  went out of the temple, having passed through the midst of them,  thus passed on.
John. And as he passed on, he saw a man blind from birth.
John. And his disciples asked him, saying, Rabbi, who sinned, this man or his parents, that he would be born blind?
John. Jesus answered, Neither this man sinned, nor his parents,  that the works of God might be manifested in him.
John. I must work the works of him who sent me while it is day. Night comes when no man can work.
John. When I am in the world, I am the light of the world.
John. Having said these things, he spat toward the ground,  made clay of the spittle,  rubbed the clay on the eyes of the blind man.
John. And he said to him, Go, wash in the pool of Siloam (which is translated, He who has been sent). Therefore he went and washed,  came seeing.
John. The neighbors therefore and those who saw him formerly, that he was blind, said, Is this not he who sits and begs?
John. Others said, He is this man,  others said, He is like him. That man said, I am.
John. They said to him therefore, How were thine eyes opened?
John. That man answered and said, A man called Jesus made clay,  rubbed on my eyes,  said to me, Go to the pool of Siloam and wash. And after going and washing, I received sight.
John. Therefore they said to him, Where is that man? He says, I do not know.
John. They brought him to the Pharisees-the former blind man.
John. Now it was a sabbath when Jesus made the clay and opened his eyes.
John. Again therefore the Pharisees also asked him how he received sight. And he said to them, He put clay upon my eyes,  I washed,  I see.
John. Therefore some of the Pharisees said, This man is not from God, because he does not keep the sabbath. Other men said, How is a sinful man able to do such signs? And there was division among them.
John. They say again to the blind man, What do thou say about him, that he opened thine eyes? And he said, He is a prophet.
John. The Jews therefore did not believe about him, that he had been blind,  had received sight, until they called the parents of the man who had received sight.
John. And they asked them, saying, Is this your son, whom ye say that he was born blind? How then does he now see?
John. And his parents answered them and said, We know that this is our son,  that he was born blind,
John. but how he now sees, we know not. Or who opened his eyes, we know not. He has maturity, ask him. He will speak for himself.
John. His parents spoke these things because they feared the Jews, for the Jews had agreed already, that if any man confessed him as Christ, he should become excommunicated from the synagogue.
John. Because of this his parents said, He has maturity, ask him.
John. So they called the man who was blind, for a second time,  said to him, Give glory to God. We know that this man is sinful.
John. That man therefore answered and said, If he is sinful, I know not. One thing I know, that being blind, now I see.
John. But again they said to him, What did he do to thee? How did he open thine eyes?
John. He answered them, I told you already,  ye did not listen. Why do ye want to hear it again? Do ye not also want to become his disciples?
John. They reviled him,  said, Thou are a disciple of that man,  we are disciples of Moses.
John. We know that God has spoken to Moses,  this man, we know not where he is from.
John. The man answered and said to them, For in this it is amazing, that ye know not where he is from,  yet he opened my eyes.
John. And we know that God does not listen to sinners,  if any man is a worshiper of God,  does his will, he listens to this man.
John. From the age, it was not heard that any man opened the eyes of a man who was born blind.
John. If this man were not from God, he could do nothing.
John. They answered and said to him, Thou were born entirely in sins,  thou teach us? And they cast him outside.
John. Jesus heard that they cast him outside. And having found him, he said to him, Do thou believe in the Son of God?
John. That man answered and said, And who is he, Lord, that I may believe in him?
John. And Jesus said to him, Thou have both seen him,  he is that man who speaks with thee.
John. And he affirmed, Lord, I believe. And he worshiped him.
John. And Jesus said, For judgment I came into this world, so that those not seeing might see,  those who see might become blind.
John. And those of the Pharisees who were with him heard these things,  they said to him, Are we also blind?
John. Jesus said to them, If ye were blind, ye would have no sin,  now ye say, We see, therefore your sin remains.
John. Truly, truly, I say to you, he who does not enter in by the door into the fold of the sheep,  goes up some other way, that man is a thief and a robber.
John. But he who enters in by the door is the shepherd of the sheep.
John. The gatekeeper opens to this man. And the sheep hear his voice,  he calls his own sheep by name,  leads them out.
John. And when he puts forth his own sheep, he goes before them. And the sheep follow him because they know his voice.
John. And they will, no, not follow a stranger,  will flee from him, because they do not recognize the voice of strangers.
John. Jesus spoke this allegory to them,  those men did not understand what it was that he spoke to them.
John. Jesus therefore said to them again, Truly, truly, I say to you, that I am the door of the sheep.
John. All, as many as came before me are thieves and robbers,  the sheep did not hear them.
John. I am the door. If any man enters in by me, he will be saved,  will come in and go out,  will find pasture.
John. The thief comes not, except that he might steal and kill and destroy. I came so that they might have life,  have it more abundantly.
John. I am the good shepherd. The good shepherd lays down his life for the sheep.
John. But the hired man,  not being the shepherd, whose sheep are not his own, sees the wolf coming,  leaves the sheep and flees. And the wolf catches them,  scatters the sheep.
John. But the hireling flees because he is a hireling,  it is no care to him about the sheep.
John. I am the good shepherd,  I know mine,  I am known by mine.
John. Just as the Father knows me, I also know the Father,  I lay down my life for the sheep.
John. And I have other sheep that are not of this fold. I must bring those also,  they will hear my voice. And there will become one flock, one shepherd.
John. Because of this the Father loves me, because I lay down my life, so that I may take it again.
John. No man takes it from me,  I lay it down by myself. I have power to lay it down,  I have power to take it again. I received this commandment from my Father.
John. Therefore again there became a division among the Jews because of these words.
John. And many of them said, He has a demon,  is mad. Why do ye listen to him?
John. Others said, These are not the sayings of a man possessed with a demon. Can a demon open the eyes of the blind?
John. And the feast of the dedication happened at Jerusalem,  it was winter.
John. And Jesus was walking in the temple in Solomon's porch.
John. The Jews therefore surrounded him,  said to him, When do thou lift up our soul? If thou are the Christ, tell us plainly.
John. Jesus answered them, I told you,  ye did not believe. The works that I do in my Father's name, these testify about me.
John. But ye do not believe, for ye are not of my sheep, as I said to you.
John. My sheep hear my voice,  I know them,  they follow me.
John. And I give them eternal life,  they will, no, not perish into the age,  not any will snatch them out of my hand.
John. My Father who has given to me, is greater than all,  not one is able to snatch out of my Father's hand.
John. I and the Father are one.
John. Therefore again the Jews took up stones so that they might stone him.
John. Jesus answered them, I have shown you many good works from my Father. Because of them, which work do ye stone me?
John. The Jews answered him, saying, We stone thee not about a good work,  about blasphemy,  because thou, being a man, make thyself God.
John. Jesus answered them, Is it not written in your law, I said, ye are gods?
John. If he designated those men gods, for whom the word of God came to be (and the scripture cannot be broken),
John. whom the Father made holy and sent into the world, do ye say, Thou blaspheme, because I said, I am the Son of God?
John. If I am not doing the works of my Father, do not believe me.
John. But if I am doing them, even though ye do not believe me, believe the works, that ye may know and believe that the Father is in me,  I in him.
John. Therefore they sought again to take him,  he went forth out of their hand.
John. And he departed again beyond the Jordan into the place where John was first immersing,  he stayed there.
John. And many came to him,  they said, John indeed did not one sign,  all, as many things as John spoke about this man, were true.
John. And many believed in him there.
John. Now a certain Lazarus, from Bethany of the village of Mary and her sister Martha, was sick.
John. And Mary was the woman who anointed the Lord with ointment,  wiped his feet with her hair, whose brother Lazarus was sick.
John. The sisters therefore sent to him, saying, Lord, behold, he whom thou love is sick.
John. But when Jesus heard, he said, This sickness is not about death,  for the glory of God, so that the Son of God may be glorified by it.
John. Now Jesus loved Martha and her sister and Lazarus.
John. When therefore he heard that he is sick, then he actually remained two days in that place he was.
John. Later after this he says to the disciples, Let us go into Judea again.
John. The disciples say to him, Rabbi, the Jews were now seeking to stone thee,  thou go there again.
John. Jesus answered, Are there not twelve hours in the day? If a man walks in the day, he does not stumble, because he sees the light of this world.
John. But if any man walks in the night, he stumbles, because the light is not in him.
John. He spoke these things,  after this he says to them, Our friend Lazarus has become asleep,  I go that I may awake him.
John. His disciples therefore said, Lord, if he has become asleep, he will be healed.
John. But Jesus had spoken about his death,  those men thought that he was speaking about the restfulness of sleep.
John. Therefore Jesus then said to them plainly, Lazarus died.
John. And I am glad for your sakes that I was not there, so that ye may believe. Nevertheless let us go to him.
John. Therefore Thomas, called Didymus, said to his fellow disciples, Let us also go, that we may die with him.
John. So when Jesus came, he found him already four days being kept in the sepulcher.
John. Now Bethany was near Jerusalem, about fifteen furlongs away from it,
John. and many of the Jews had come to the women, about Martha and Mary, so that they might console them about their brother.
John. Therefore Martha, when she heard that Jesus was coming, met him,  Mary was sitting in the house.
John. Martha therefore said to Jesus, Lord, if thou were here, my brother would not have died.
John. But I know even now that as many things as thou may ask of God, God will give to thee.
John. Jesus says to her, Thy brother will rise.
John. Martha says to him, I know that he will rise in the resurrection at the last day.
John. Jesus said to her, I am the resurrection and the life. He who believes in me, even though he died, he will live.
John. And every man who lives and believes in me will, no, not die, into the age. Do thou believe this?
John. She says to him, Yes, Lord, I have believed that thou are the Christ, the Son of God who comes into the world.
John. And when she said these things, she departed and called Mary her sister privately, saying, The teacher is here and calls thee.
John. When that woman heard, she rises quickly,  comes to him.
John. (Now Jesus had not yet come into the village,  was in the place where Martha met him.)
John. The Jews therefore being with her in the house and consoling her, having seen Mary, that she rose up quickly and went out, followed her, saying that she was going to the sepulcher that she may weep there.
John. Therefore when Mary came where Jesus was, after seeing him, she fell down at his feet, saying to him, Lord, if thou were here, my brother would not have died.
John. When Jesus therefore saw her weeping,  the Jews who gathered with her, weeping, he groaned in the spirit,  was himself troubled.
John. And he said, Where have ye laid him? They said to him, Lord, come and see.
John. Jesus wept.
John. The Jews therefore said, Behold how he loved him.
John. But some of them said, This man who opened the eyes of the blind man, was he not also able to cause that this man also would not die?
John. Jesus therefore again groaning in himself comes to the sepulcher. Now it was a cave,  a stone lay against it.
John. Jesus says, Take ye away the stone. Martha, the sister of the man who came to end, says to him, Lord, he smells now, for it is the fourth day.
John. Jesus says to her, Did I not to say thee, that if thou believed, thou will see the glory of God?
John. So they took away the stone where the man who died was laying. And Jesus lifted up his eyes,  said, Father, I thank thee that thou heard me.
John. And I had known that thou always hear me,  because of the multitude that stands by I spoke, so that they may believe that thou sent me.
John. And having said these things, he cried out with a great voice, Lazarus, come out.
John. And the man who died came forth, wrapped hands and feet with grave-clothes,  his face had been wrapped around with a face cloth. Jesus says to them, Loose him,  allow him to go.
John. Therefore many of the Jews who came to Mary,  who saw what Jesus did, believed in him.
John. But some of them went away to the Pharisees,  told them what things Jesus did.
John. Therefore the chief priests and the Pharisees gathered a council,  said, What are we doing? Because this man does many signs.
John. If we allow him this way, all men will believe in him,  the Romans will come and take away both our place and the nation.
John. And a certain one of them, Caiaphas, being high priest that year, said to them, Ye know nothing at all,
John. nor do ye consider that it is expedient for us that one man should die for the people,  not the whole nation should perish.
John. Now he said this not from himself,  being high priest that year, he prophesied that Jesus was going to die for the nation.
John. And not for the nation only,  also that he might gather together into one the children of God who are scattered abroad.
John. So from that day they consulted together so that they might kill him.
John. Jesus therefore no longer walked openly among the Jews,  departed from there into the region near the wilderness into a city called Ephraim,  he stayed there with his disciples.
John. Now the Passover of the Jews was near,  many went up to Jerusalem out of the countryside before the Passover, so that they might purify themselves.
John. Therefore they sought Jesus,  spoke with each other as they stood in the temple, What does it seem to you? That he will, no, not come to the feast?
John. Now also the chief priests and the Pharisees had given commandment, that if any man knew where he is, he should disclose it, so that they might take him.
John. Therefore six days before the Passover Jesus came to Bethany where Lazarus was, the man who died whom he raised from the dead.
John. So they made a supper for him there,  Martha served,  Lazarus was one of those who sat dining with him.
John. Mary therefore, after taking a pound of ointment of very costly genuine spikenard, anointed the feet of Jesus and wiped his feet with her hair. And the house was filled of the aroma of the ointment.
John. Therefore one of his disciples, Judas Iscariot, son of Simon, the man who was going to betray him, says,
John. Why was this ointment not sold for three hundred denarii,  given to the poor?
John. Now he said this, not because it was a concern to him about the poor,  because he was a thief,  he had the purse and removed things that were put in.
John. Jesus therefore said, Let her alone. She has keep it for the day of my burial.
John. For ye always have the poor with you,  ye do not always have me.
John. Therefore a great multitude of the Jews knew that he is there. And they came, not only because of Jesus,  that they might also see Lazarus whom he had raised from the dead.
John. But the chief priests decided that they should kill Lazarus also,
John. since because of him many of the Jews were going and were believing in Jesus.
John. On the morrow a great multitude having come to the feast, when they heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem,
John. took the branches of the palm trees,  went forth to meet him,  cried out, Hosanna! Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord, the King of Israel!
John. And Jesus, having found a young donkey, sat on it, as it is written,
John. Fear not, daughter of Zion. Behold, thy King comes, sitting on a donkey's colt.
John. Now his disciples did not understand these things at first,  when Jesus was glorified, then they remembered that these were things written because of him,  they did these things to him.
John. Therefore the multitude, the one that was with him when he called Lazarus from the sepulcher,  raised him from the dead, testified.
John. Also because of this the multitude met him, because they heard of him doing this sign.
John. The Pharisees therefore said among themselves, Do ye see that ye accomplish nothing. Behold, the world has gone after him.
John. Now some Greeks were from those who came up so that they might worship at the feast.
John. These men therefore came to Philip, the man from Bethsaida of Galilee,  asked him, saying, Sir, we want to see Jesus.
John. Philip comes and tells Andrew,  again Andrew and Philip tell Jesus.
John. And Jesus answered them saying, The hour has come that the Son of man should be glorified.
John. Truly, truly, I say to you, unless the grain of wheat that falls into the ground dies, it remains alone,  if it dies it bears much fruit.
John. He who loves his life will lose it,  he who hates his life in this world will keep it for eternal life.
John. If any man serves me, let him follow me,  where I am, there my helper will also be. And if any man serves me, the Father will honor him.
John. Now is my soul troubled,  what shall I say? Father, save me from this hour. But because of this I came to this hour.
John. Father, glorify thy name. A voice therefore came out of heaven, saying, I both glorified it,  I will glorify again.
John. The multitude therefore that stood by and heard, said thunder occurred, others said, An agent has spoken to him.
John. Jesus answered and said, This voice occurred not for my sake,  for your sakes.
John. Now is the judgment of this world. Now the ruler of this world will be cast out.
John. And I, if I am lifted up from the earth, I will draw all men to myself.
John. And he said this, signifying by what death he was going to die.
John. The multitude answered him, We have heard from the law that the Christ remains into the age. And how can thou say, The Son of man must be lifted up? Who is this Son of man?
John. Jesus therefore said to them, Yet a little time the light is with you. Walk while ye have the light, so that darkness may not overcome you. And he who walks in the darkness knows not where he is going.
John. While ye have the light, believe in the light, so that ye may become sons of light. Jesus spoke these things,  after departing, he was hid from them.
John. But although having done so many signs before them, they did not believe in him,
John. so that the word of Isaiah the prophet that he spoke might be fulfilled: Lord, who has believed our report? And to whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed?
John. Because of this they could not believe. Because Isaiah said again,
John. He has blinded their eyes,  has hardened their heart, so that they would not see with their eyes,  understand with their heart,  be turned,  I would heal them.
John. Isaiah said these things when he saw his glory,  spoke about him.
John. Yet, nevertheless, even many of the rulers believed in him,  because of the Pharisees they did not confess, so that they would not become excommunicated from the synagogue,
John. for they loved the praise of men more than the praise of God.
John. And Jesus cried out and said, He who believes in me, believes not in me,  in him who sent me.
John. And he who sees me sees him who sent me.
John. I have come a light into the world, so that every man who believes in me may not remain in the darkness.
John. And if any man hears my sayings,  will not believe, I do not judge him, for I came not so that I might judge the world,  that I might save the world.
John. He who rejects me and does not receive my sayings, has that which judges him: the word that I spoke, that will judge him in the last day.
John. Because I spoke not from myself,  the Father who sent me, he gave me commandment, what I should say,  what I should speak.
John. And I know that his commandment is eternal life. Therefore what things I speak, just as the Father has said to me, so I speak.
John. Now before the feast of the Passover, Jesus, having seen that his hour has come that he would depart out of this world to his Father, having loved his own in the world, he loved them to the end.
John. And supper having occurred, the devil having now put into the heart of Judas Iscariot, Simon's son, that he would betray him,
John. Jesus, having seen that the Father has given all the things to him, into his hands,  that he came from God,  goes to God,
John. rises from supper,  set his garments aside,  after taking a towel, he girded himself.
John. Then he pours water into the wash-basin,  began to wash the disciples' feet,  to wipe them with the towel with which he was girded.
John. So he comes to Simon Peter,  that man says to him, Lord, do thou wash my feet?
John. Jesus answered and said to him, What I do thou do not know now,  thou will understand after these things.
John. Peter says to him, Thou may, no, not wash my feet into the age. Jesus answered him, If I may not wash thee, thou have no part with me.
John. Simon Peter says to him, Lord, not my feet only,  also my hands and head.
John. Jesus says to him, He who is bathed has no need to wash the feet either,  is entirely clean. And ye are clean,  not all.
John. For he knew the man betraying him. Because of this he said, Ye are not all clean.
John. When therefore he washed their feet,  took his garments, having sat down again, he said to them, Do ye understand what I have done to you?
John. Ye call me, Teacher, , Lord. And ye say well, for I am.
John. If I then, the Lord and the teacher, have washed your feet, ye also ought to wash each other's feet.
John. For I have given you an example, so that just as I have done to you ye also should do.
John. Truly, truly, I say to you, a bondman is not greater than his lord, nor is an apostle greater than he who sent him.
John. If ye have seen these things, blessed are ye if ye do them.
John. I speak not about you all. I have seen whom I chose,  that the scripture may be fulfilled, He who eats bread with me lifted up his heel against me.
John. From henceforth I tell you before it happens, so that when it happens, ye may believe that I am.
John. Truly, truly, I say to you, he who receives any man whomever I may send, receives me,  he who receives me receives him who sent me.
John. Having said these things, Jesus was troubled in the spirit,  testified and said, Truly, truly, I say to you, that one of you will betray me.
John. Therefore the disciples looked at each other, being uncertain about whom he speaks.
John. And one of his disciples whom Jesus loved was sitting at Jesus' bosom.
John. Simon Peter therefore gestured to this man to inquire whoever he may be about whom he speaks.
John. And that man, having leaned thus toward Jesus' breast, says to him, Lord, who is he?
John. Jesus replies, He is that man to whom I, having dipped the morsel, will give. And when he dipped the morsel, he gives it to Judas Iscariot, the son of Simon.
John. And after the morsel, then Satan entered into that man. Jesus therefore says to him, What thou do, do more quickly.
John. But no man who was sitting knew why he said this to him.
John. For some thought, since Judas had the purse, that Jesus said to him, Buy what things we have need of for the feast, or that he should give something to the poor.
John. Therefore having received the morsel, straightaway that man went out,  it was night.
John. When he went out, Jesus says, Now the Son of man is glorified,  God is glorified in him.
John. If God is glorify in him, God will also glorify him in himself,  he will glorify him straightaway.
John. Little children, yet a little while I am with you. Ye will seek me,  as I said to the Jews, Where I go, ye cannot come, I also now say to you.
John. A new commandment I give to you, that ye should love each other, just as I loved you, so that ye also should love each other.
John. By this all men will know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love among each other.
John. Simon Peter says to him, Lord, where do thou go? Jesus answered him, Where I go, thou cannot follow me now,  thou will follow me afterwards.
John. Peter said to him, Lord, why cannot I follow thee now? I will lay down my life for thee.
John. Jesus answered him, Will thou lay down thy life for me? Truly, truly, I say to thee, A cock will, no, not sound, until thou will deny me thrice.
John. Let not your heart be troubled. Ye believe in God, believe also in me.
John. In my Father's house are many dwellings,  if not, I would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you.
John. And if I go and prepare a place for you, I come again,  will take you along to myself, so that where I am, ye may be also.
John. And ye know where I go,  ye know the way.
John. Thomas says to him, Lord, we know not where thou go. How can we know the way?
John. Jesus says to him, I am the way,  the truth,  the life. No man comes to the Father, except by me.
John. If ye had known me, ye would have known my Father also. And from henceforth ye know him,  have seen him.
John. Philip says to him, Lord, show us the Father,  it is enough for us.
John. Jesus says to him, Have I been so long a time with you,  thou do not know me, Philip? He who has seen me has seen the Father. And how can thou say, Show us the Father?
John. Do thou not believe that I am in the Father,  the Father in me? The sayings that I speak to you I speak not from myself,  the Father who dwells in me, he does the works.
John. Believe me that I am in the Father,  the Father in me. But if not, believe me because of the works themselves.
John. Truly, truly, I say to you, he who believes in me, the works that I do, that man will also do. And he will do greater than these, because I go to the Father.
John. And anything whatever ye may ask in my name, this I will do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son.
John. If ye will ask me anything in my name, I will do it.
John. If ye love me, keep my commandments.
John. And I will ask the Father,  he will give you another helper, so that he may dwell with you into the age,
John. the Spirit of truth, which the world cannot receive, because it does not see nor know it. But ye know it, because it dwells with you,  will be in you.
John. I will not leave you orphaned. I am coming to you.
John. Yet a little while,  the world sees me no more,  ye see me. Because I live, ye will also live.
John. In that day ye will know that I am in my Father,  ye in me,  I in you.
John. He who has my commandments,  keeps them, that man it is who loves me. And he who loves me will be loved by my Father,  I will love him,  will manifest myself to him.
John. Judas (not Iscariot) says to him, Lord,  what has happened that thou are going to manifest thyself to us,  not to the world?
John. Jesus answered and said to him, If any man loves me, he will keep my word,  my Father will love him,  we will come to him and make a dwelling with him.
John. He who does not love me does not keep my words. And the word that ye hear is not mine,  the Father's who sent me.
John. I have spoken these things to you while remaining with you.
John. But the helper, the Holy Spirit that the Father will send in my name, he will teach you all things,  will remind you of all that I said to you.
John. Peace I leave with you. My peace I give to you, not as the world gives, do I give to you. Let not your heart be troubled, nor let it be cowardly.
John. Ye heard that I said to you, I go,  I come to you. If ye loved me, ye would have rejoiced because I said I go to the Father, because my Father is greater than I.
John. And now I have told you before it happens, so that when it happens, ye might believe.
John. I will no longer speak many things with you, for the ruler of the world comes. And he has nothing on me,
John. but that the world may know that I love the Father. And as the Father commanded me, thus I do. Arise, let us go from here.
John. I am the true grapevine,  my Father is the farmer.
John. Every branch in me not bearing fruit, he removes it. And every branch that bears fruit, he prunes it, so that it may bear more fruit.
John. Now ye are clean because of the word that I have spoken to you.
John. Dwell in me,  I in you. Just as the branch cannot bear fruit of itself, unless it dwells in the grapevine, so neither ye, if ye do not dwell in me.
John. I am the grapevine, ye are the branches. He who dwells in me,  I in him, this man bears much fruit, because without me ye can do nothing.
John. If any man does not dwell in me, he is cast out as a branch and is withered. And they gather them,  cast them into the fire,  are burned.
John. If ye dwell in me,  my sayings dwell in you, ye will ask whatever ye may want,  it will be done to you.
John. By this my Father is glorified, that ye may bear much fruit,  ye will become my disciples.
John. As the Father has loved me, I also have loved you. Dwell ye in my love.
John. If ye keep my commandments, ye will dwell in my love, just as I have kept my Father's commandments,  dwell in his love.
John. These things I have spoken to you that my joy may dwell in you,  your joy may be full.
John. This is my commandment, that ye love each other, just as I have loved you.
John. Greater love has no man than this, that some man lay down his life for his friends.
John. Ye are my friends, if ye do as many things as I command you.
John. I no longer call you bondmen, because the bondman does not know what his lord does. But I have called you friends, because all things that I heard from my Father, I made known to you.
John. Ye did not choose out me,  I chose out you,  appointed you, so that ye should go and bear fruit,  that your fruit may remain, so that anything whatever ye may ask of the Father in my name, he may give you.
John. These things I command you, so that ye may love each other.
John. If the world hates you, know that it has hated me before you.
John. If ye were of the world, the world would love its own,  because ye are not of the world (instead I chose you out of the world), because of this the world hates you.
John. Remember the word that I said to you, A bondman is not greater than his lord. If they persecuted me, they will persecute you also. If they kept my word, they will keep yours also.
John. But all these things they will do to you because of my name, because they have not known him who sent me.
John. If I had not come and spoken to them, they would not have had sin,  now they have no excuse for their sin.
John. He who hates me hates my Father also.
John. If I had not done among them the works that no other man has done, they would not have had sin,  now they have both seen and hated both me and my Father.
John. But, that the word that is written in their law may be fulfilled, They hated me without cause.
John. But when the helper comes whom I will send to you from the Father, the Spirit of truth that proceeds from the Father, that will testify about me.
John. And ye also testify, because ye have been with me from the beginning.
John. I have spoken these things to you, so that ye may not be caused to stumble.
John. They will make you excommunicated from the synagogues. But the hour comes that every man who kills you will presume to be offering service to God.
John. And they will do these things, because they have not known the Father nor me.
John. But I have told you these things, so that when the hour comes, ye may remember that I told you of them. But I did not tell you these things from the beginning because I was with you.
John. But now I go to him who sent me,  none of you asks me, Where do thou go?
John. But because I have spoken these things to you, sorrow has filled your heart.
John. Nevertheless I tell you the truth, it is expedient for you that I depart, for if I do not depart, the helper will not come to you. But whenever I go, I will send him to you.
John. And having come, that will convict the world about sin,  about justice,  about judgment.
John. About sin because they truly did not believe in me,
John. and about justice because I go to the Father,  ye see me no more,
John. and about judgment because the ruler of this world has been judged.
John. I have yet many things to say to you,  ye cannot bear them now.
John. However when that, the Spirit of truth, comes, he will guide you into all the truth. For he will not speak from himself,  as many things as he may hear, he will speak. And he will report to you the things that are coming.
John. He will glorify me because he will receive from me,  will report to you.
John. All things, as many as the Father has are mine. Because of this I said that he takes from me,  will report to you.
John. A little while,  ye do not see me. Again a little while,  ye will look at me, because I go to the Father.
John. Therefore some of his disciples said among themselves, What is this that he says to us, A little while,  ye do not see me, , Again a little while,  ye will look at me, , Because I go to the Father?
John. They said therefore What is this that he says, A little while? We know not what he says.
John. Therefore Jesus knew that they wanted to ask him,  he said to them, Do ye inquire among yourselves about this, because I said, A little while,  ye do not see me, , Again a little while,  ye will look at me?
John. Truly, truly, I say to you, that ye will weep and lament,  the world will rejoice. Ye will be sorrowful,  your sorrow will become into joy.
John. When a woman brings forth she has pain because her hour has come. But when she has given birth to the child she no longer remembers the anguish because of the joy that a man was born into the world.
John. And now therefore indeed ye have sorrow,  I will see you again,  your heart will rejoice,  no man takes your joy away from you.
John. And in that day ye will ask me nothing. Truly, truly, I say to you, that as many things as ye may ask the Father in my name, he will give you.
John. Until now ye have asked nothing in my name. Ask,  ye will receive, so that your joy may be made full.
John. These things I have spoken to you in veiled words. The hour comes, when I will no more speak to you in veiled words,  will inform you plainly about the Father.
John. In that day ye will ask in my name,  I do not say to you, that I will pray the Father about you,
John. for the Father himself loves you, because ye have loved me,  have believed that I came forth from God.
John. I came forth from the Father,  have come into the world. Again I leave the world,  go to the Father.
John. His disciples say to him, Lo, now thou speak plainly,  speak not one veiled word.
John. Now we know that thou know all things,  have no need that any man should question thee. By this we believe that thou came forth from God.
John. Jesus answered them, Do ye now believe?
John. Behold, the hour comes,  now has come, that ye will be scattered, each man to his own things,  ye will leave me alone. And yet I am not alone, because the Father is with me.
John. These things I have spoken to you, so that in me ye might have peace. In the world ye have tribulation. But cheer up, I have overcome the world.
John. Jesus spoke these things,  he lifted up his eyes to heaven,  said, Father, the hour has come. Glorify thy Son, that the Son may also glorify thee,
John. just as thou gave him authority over all flesh, so that all things that thou have given him, he will give them eternal life.
John. And this is eternal life, that they should know thee the only true God,  Jesus Christ whom thou sent.
John. I glorified thee on the earth. I finished the work which thou have given me that I should do.
John. And now, Father, glorify thou me with thyself with the glory that I had with thee before the world was.
John. I manifested thy name to the men whom thou gave me out of the world. They were thine,  thou gave them to me,  they have kept thy word.
John. Now they know that all things, as many as thou gave me are from thee.
John. Because the sayings that thou gave to me, I gave to them. And they received them,  knew truly that I came forth from thee,  they believed that thou sent me.
John. I pray about them. I do not pray about the world,  about whom thou have given me, because they are for thee.
John. And all my things are thy things,  thy things are my things,  I am glorified in them.
John. And I am no more in the world,  these are in the world,  I come to thee. Holy Father, keep them in thy name that thou have given to me, so that they may be one, just as we.
John. While I was with them in the world, I kept them in thy name. Whom thou gave to me, I kept,  none of them was destroyed, except the son of destruction, so that the scripture might be fulfilled.
John. And now I come to thee. And I speak these things in the world, so that they may have my joy fulfilled in them.
John. I have given them thy word,  the world hated them, because they are not of the world, just as I am not of the world.
John. I pray not that thou should take them out of the world,  that thou should keep them from the evil.
John. They are not of the world just as I am not of the world.
John. Sanctify them in thy truth. Thy word is truth.
John. Just as thou sent me into the world, so also I sent them into the world.
John. And for their sakes I sanctify myself, so that they may also themselves be sanctified in truth.
John. And I pray not about these only,  also about those who believe in me through their word,
John. so that they may all be one, just as thou, Father, are in me,  I in thee, that they also may be in us, so that the world may believe that thou sent me.
John. And I, the glory that thou have given me, I have given to them, so that they may be one, just as we are one,
John. I in them,  thou in me, that they may be fully perfected in one,  so that the world may know that thou sent me,  loved them, just as thou loved me.
John. Father, whom thou gave to me, I desire that where I am, they also may be with me, so that they may see my glory that thou have given me, because thou loved me before the foundation of the world.
John. And righteous Father, the world does not know thee,  I know thee,  these know that thou sent me.
John. And I made known to them thy name,  I will make it known, so that the love that thou loved me may be in them,  I in them.
John. After speaking these things, Jesus went forth with his disciples on the other side of the brook Kidron, where there was a garden into which he entered, he and his disciples.
John. Now Judas, the man betraying him, had also known the place, because Jesus also often gathered there with his disciples.
John. Judas therefore having received the band and subordinates from the chief priests and the Pharisees, comes there with lanterns and torches and weapons.
John. Jesus therefore knowing all the things that were coming upon him, after going forth, he says to them, Whom seek ye?
John. They answered him, Jesus the Nazarene. Jesus says to them, I am he. And Judas, the man betraying him had also stood with them.
John. When therefore he said to them, I am he, they went backward and fell to the ground.
John. Again therefore he questioned them, Whom seek ye? And they said, Jesus the Nazarene.
John. Jesus answered, I told you that I am. If therefore ye seek me, allow these men to go,
John. so that the word that he spoke might be fulfilled, Of whom thou have given me, I lost, no, not one of them.
John. Simon Peter therefore, having a sword, drew it and struck the high priest's bondman,  cut off his right ear. Now the servant's name was Malchus.
John. Jesus therefore said to Peter, Put up thy sword into the sheath. The cup that the Father has given me, shall I, no, not drink it?
John. So the band,  the chief captain,  the subordinates of the Jews, arrested Jesus and bound him,
John. and led him away first to Annas. For he was father-in-law of Caiaphas, who was high priest that year.
John. Now Caiaphas was the man who counseled the Jews that it was expedient for one man to die on behalf of the people.
John. And Simon Peter followed Jesus, also the other disciple. But that disciple was known to the high priest,  he went in with Jesus into the courtyard of the high priest.
John. But Peter had stood near the door outside. So the other disciple, who was known to the high priest, went out and spoke to the doorkeeper and brought in Peter.
John. Therefore the servant girl (the doorkeeper) says to Peter, Are thou not also of this man's disciples? That man says, I am not.
John. Now the bondmen and the subordinates had stood, having made a fire of coals because it was cold,  they were warming themselves. And Peter was also standing with them warming himself.
John. The high priest therefore asked Jesus about his disciples,  about his doctrine.
John. Jesus answered him, I spoke in public to the world. I always taught in a synagogue,  in the temple where the Jews always gather together,  I spoke nothing in secret.
John. Why question thou me? Question those who have heard what I said to them. Behold, these know the things that I said.
John. And when he said these things, one of the subordinates standing by gave a slap to Jesus, saying, Answer thou the high priest this way?
John. Jesus answered him, If I spoke wrongly, testify about the wrong,  if correctly, why strike me?
John. Annas sent him bound to Caiaphas the high priest.
John. Now Simon Peter was standing and warming himself. Therefore they said to him, Are thou not also of his disciples? That man therefore denied,  said, I am not.
John. One of the bondmen of the high priest, being a kinsman of him whose ear Peter cut off, says, Did I not see thee in the garden with him?
John. Peter therefore denied again,  straightaway a cock sounded.
John. They lead Jesus therefore from Caiaphas to the Praetorium. And it was early,  they did not enter into the Praetorium, so that they would not be defiled,  that they might eat the Passover.
John. Pilate therefore went out to them,  said, What accusation do ye bring against this man?
John. They answered and said to him, If this man were not an evildoer, we would not have delivered him up to thee.
John. Pilate therefore said to them, Take ye him,  judge him according to your law. The Jews therefore said to him, It is not permitted for us to kill any man,
John. so that the word of Jesus might be fulfilled that he spoke, signifying what kind of death he was going to die.
John. Pilate therefore again entered into the Praetorium,  called Jesus,  said to him, Are thou the king of the Jews?
John. Jesus answered, Do thou say this of thyself, or did others tell thee about me?
John. Pilate answered, Am I a Jew? Thine own nation and the chief priests delivered thee to me. What have thou done?
John. Jesus answered, My kingdom is not of this world. If my kingdom were of this world my subordinates would have fought so that I would not be delivered to the Jews,  now my kingdom is not from here.
John. Pilate therefore said to him, Then thou are a king? Jesus answered, Thou say that I am a king. For this I have been born,  for this I have come into the world, that I would testify to the truth. Every man who is of the truth hears my voice.
John. Pilate says to him, What is truth? And having said this, he went out again to the Jews,  says to them, I find not one cause in him.
John. But there is a custom for you that I should release to you one man at the Passover. Do ye wish therefore I would release to you the king of the Jews?
John. They all cried out again therefore, saying, Not this man,  Barabbas. But Barabbas was a robber.
John. Therefore Pilate then took Jesus and scourged him.
John. And the soldiers having woven a crown of thorns, they put it on his head,  put around him a purple garment.
John. And they said, Hail, king of the Jews! And they gave him slaps.
John. Therefore Pilate again went forth outside,  says to them, Behold, I bring him out to you, so that ye may know that I find not one cause in him.
John. Jesus therefore came outside, wearing the thorny crown and the purple robe. And he says to them, Look at the man!
John. When therefore the chief priests and the subordinates saw him, they cried out, saying, Crucify, crucify him! Pilate says to them, Ye take him and crucify, for I find no cause in him.
John. The Jews answered him, We have a law,  according to our law he ought to die because he made himself the Son of God.
John. When Pilate therefore heard this word, he was more afraid.
John. And he went into the Praetorium again,  says to Jesus, Where are thou from? But Jesus gave him no answer.
John. Pilate therefore says to him, Thou do not speak to me? Know thou not that I have authority to crucify thee,  I have authority to release thee?
John. Jesus answered him, Thou would have no authority against me, unless it were given thee from above. Because of this he who delivered me to thee has greater sin.
John. From this Pilate sought to release him,  the Jews cried out, saying, If thou release this man, thou are not Caesar's friend. Every man who makes himself a king speaks against Caesar.
John. When Pilate therefore heard this word, he brought Jesus out,  sat down on the judgment seat at a place called The Pavement,  in Hebrew, Gabbatha.
John. Now it was the Preparation of the Passover,  about the sixth hour. And he says to the Jews, Look at your king!
John. But they cried out, Away, away, crucify him! Pilate says to them, Shall I crucify your king? The chief priests answered, We have no king except Caesar.
John. Therefore he then delivered him to them, so that he might be crucified,  they took and led Jesus away.
John. And he went out bearing his cross to a place called, of a Skull, a place that is called in Hebrew, Golgotha,
John. where they crucified him,  two others with him, on this side and that,  Jesus in the middle.
John. And Pilate also wrote a title,  put it on the cross. And it was written, JESUS THE NAZARENE, THE KING OF THE JEWS.
John. Therefore many of the Jews read this title, because the place where Jesus was crucified was near the city,  it was written in Hebrew, in Greek, in Latin.
John. Therefore the chief priests of the Jews said to Pilate, Do not write, The king of the Jews, , That man said I am king of the Jews.
John. Pilate answered, What I have written I have written.
John. The soldiers therefore when they crucified Jesus, took his garments and made four parts, to each soldier a part,  also the tunic. But the tunic was a seamless weave, from the top throughout.
John. They said therefore among themselves, Let us not divide it,  cast a lot for it, whose it will be, so that the scripture might be fulfilled, which says, They parted my garments among them,  for my clothing they cast a lot. Therefore the soldiers indeed did these things.
John. And his mother,  his mother's sister, Mary the wife of Cleopas,  Mary Magdalene had stood near the cross of Jesus.
John. When Jesus therefore saw his mother,  the disciple whom he loved standing by, he says to his mother, Woman, behold thy son.
John. Then he says to the disciple, Behold, thy mother. And from that hour the disciple took her to his own place.
John. After this, Jesus, having seen that all things are now completed, so that the scripture might be fully complete, says, I thirst.
John. Therefore a vessel full of vinegar was set there. And having filled a sponge with the vinegar,  having put it around a hyssop, they brought it to his mouth.
John. When therefore Jesus received the vinegar, he said, It is finished,  after bowing his head, he gave up the spirit.
John. The Jews therefore, so that the bodies would not remain on the cross on the sabbath, since it was Preparation (for it was the high day of that sabbath), they besought Pilate that their legs might be broken,  they might be removed.
John. The soldiers therefore came,  indeed broke the legs of the first,  of the other man who was crucified with him.
John. But having come to Jesus, when they saw him now having died, they did not break his legs.
John. But one of the soldiers pierced his side with a spear,  straightaway blood and water came out.
John. And he who has seen has testified,  his testimony is true. And that man knows that he speaks true, so that ye may believe.
John. For these things happened so that the scripture might be fulfilled, Not a bone of him will be broken.
John. And again another scripture says, They will look toward whom they pierced.
John. And after these things Joseph of Arimathaea, being a disciple of Jesus,  secretly because of fear of the Jews, besought Pilate that he might remove the body of Jesus,  Pilate allowed him. Therefore he came and removed the body of Jesus.
John. And Nicodemus also came (he who at the first came to Jesus by night) bringing a mixture of myrrh and aloes, about a hundred pounds.
John. So they took the body of Jesus,  wrapped it in linen cloths with the spices, just as is the custom of the Jews to bury.
John. Now a garden was in the place where he was crucified,  in the garden a new sepulcher in which no man was yet laid.
John. Therefore because of the Jews' Preparation (because the sepulcher was near) they laid Jesus there.
John. Now on the first day of the week Mary Magdalene comes early, while it was still darkness, to the sepulcher,  sees the stone taken away from the sepulcher.
John. Therefore she runs and comes to Simon Peter,  to the other disciple whom Jesus loved,  says to them, They have taken away the Lord out of the sepulcher,  we know not where they have laid him.
John. Peter therefore went forth,  the other disciple,  they went toward the sepulcher.
John. And the two men ran together,  the other disciple ran ahead quicker than Peter and came first to the sepulcher.
John. And after stooping down, he sees the linen cloths lying, yet he entered not.
John. Simon Peter therefore comes following him,  he entered into the sepulcher. And he sees the linen cloths lying,
John. and the face cloth that was on his head, not lying with the linen cloths,  wrapped up in one place separately.
John. Therefore then the other disciple who came first to the sepulcher, also entered in,  he saw and believed.
John. For they had not yet known the scripture that he must rise from the dead.
John. So the disciples departed again to themselves.
John. But Mary had stood outside near the sepulcher weeping. So, as she wept, she stooped down to the sepulcher.
John. And she sees two agents in white, sitting, one at the head and one at the feet, where the body of Jesus was lain.
John. And those men say to her, Woman, why weep thou? She says to them, Because they have taken away my Lord,  I know not where they have laid him.
John. And having said these things, she turned backward,  sees Jesus standing. And she had not known that it is Jesus.
John. Jesus says to her, Woman, why weep thou? Whom seek thou? That woman, supposing that he is the gardener, says to him, Sir, if thou have taken him, tell me where thou have laid him,  I will take him away.
John. Jesus says to her, Mary. After turning around, that woman says to him, Rabboni, which says, Teacher.
John. Jesus says to her, Do not touch me, for I have not yet ascended to my Father. But go to my brothers,  say to them, I ascend to my Father and your Father,  my God and your God.
John. Mary Magdalene comes informing the disciples that she has seen the Lord,  he spoke these things to her.
John. Therefore being evening that day, the first day of the week,  the doors having been shut where the disciples were who assembled because of fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood in the midst,  says to them, Peace to you.
John. And having said this, he showed them his hands and side. His disciples therefore rejoiced when they saw the Lord.
John. Jesus therefore said to them again, Peace to you. As the Father has sent me, I also send you.
John. And after saying this, he breathed on them,  says to them, Receive ye the Holy Spirit.
John. If ye forgive the sins of any, they are forgiven them. If ye retain of any, they are retained.
John. But Thomas, one of the twelve, called Didymus, was not with them when Jesus came.
John. The other disciples therefore said to him, We have seen the Lord. But he said to them, Unless I may see the mark of the nails in his hands,  put my finger into the mark of the nails,  put my hand into his side, I will, no, not believe.
John. And after eight days his disciples were again inside,  Thomas with them. Jesus comes, the doors being shut,  stood in the midst,  said, Peace to you.
John. Then he says to Thomas, Bring thy finger here,  see my hands,  bring thy hand,  put into my side,  do not become faithless,  believing.
John. Thomas answered and said to him, My Lord and my God.
John. Jesus says to him, Because thou have seen me, thou have believed. Blessed are those who have not seen,  have believed.
John. And indeed therefore many other signs Jesus did in the presence of his disciples, which are not written in this book.
John. But these are written, so that ye may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God,  that believing ye may have life in his name.
John. After these things Jesus manifested himself again to his disciples at the sea of Tiberias. And he revealed himself this way.
John. There were together, Simon Peter,  Thomas called Didymus,  Nathanael of Cana in Galilee,  the sons of Zebedee,  two other men of his disciples.
John. Simon Peter says to them, I am going to harvest fish. They say to him, We also go with thee. They went forth,  straightaway entered into the boat. And in that night they caught nothing.
John. But having now become morning, Jesus stood on the shore. However the disciples had not seen that it was Jesus.
John. Therefore Jesus says to them, Children, have ye anything eatable? They answered him, No.
John. And he said to them, Cast the net on the right side of the boat,  ye will find. Therefore they cast,  they were no longer able to draw it for the magnitude of fishes.
John. That disciple therefore whom Jesus loved says to Peter, It is the Lord. So when Simon Peter heard that it is the Lord, he tied the coat around himself (for he was undressed),  threw himself into the sea.
John. And the other disciples came in the skiff (for they were not far from the land,  about two hundred cubits off), dragging the net of the fishes.
John. So when they came to the land, they saw a fire of coals set,  fish laying on it,  bread.
John. Jesus says to them, Bring from the fishes that ye now caught.
John. Simon Peter went up,  drew the net to land, full of great fishes, a hundred and fifty-three. And being so many, the net was not broken.
John. Jesus says to them, Come, eat breakfast. And none of the disciples dared to query him, Who are thou? knowing that it is the Lord.
John. Jesus therefore comes,  takes the bread,  gives to them,  the fish likewise.
John. This is now a third time Jesus was manifested to his disciples after being raised from the dead.
John. So when they ate breakfast, Jesus says to Simon Peter, Simon, son of Jonah, do thou love me more than these things? He says to him, Yea, Lord. Thou know that I love thee. He says to him, Feed my lambs.
John. He says to him again a second time, Simon, son of Jonah, do thou love me? He says to him, Yea, Lord. Thou know that I love thee. He says to him, Feed my sheep.
John. He says to him the third time, Simon, son of Jonah, do thou love me? Peter was grieved because he said to him the third time, Do thou love me? And he said to him, Lord, thou know all things. Thou know that I love thee. Jesus says to him, Feed my sheep.
John. Truly, truly, I say to thee, When thou were younger, thou girded thyself,  walked where thou would,  when thou become old, thou will stretch forth thy hands,  another will gird thee,  carry thee where thou do not want.
John. Now he said this, signifying by what kind of death he will glorify God. And after saying this, he says to him, Follow me.
John. But Peter, having turned around, sees the disciple whom Jesus loves, following, who also leaned near his chest at the supper,  said, Lord, who is the man betraying thee?
John. Having seen this man, Peter says to Jesus, Lord,  what of this man?
John. Jesus says to him, If I want him to remain until I come, what is it to thee? Follow thou me.
John. This saying therefore went forth among the brothers, that that disciple does not die. And yet Jesus did not say to him, that he does not die, , If I want him to remain until I come, what is it to thee?
John. This is the disciple who testifies about these things,  who wrote these things. And we know that his testimony is true.
John. And there are also many other things, as many as Jesus did, which if they would be written every one, I suppose not even the world itself to make room for the books being written. Truly.
Acts
Acts. I indeed made the former treatise, O Theophilus, about all things that Jesus began both to do and to teach,
Acts. until a day in which he was taken up, having commanded, through the Holy Spirit, the apostles whom he chose,
Acts. to whom he also presented himself living, after his suffering, by many infallible proofs, being seen by them during forty days,  speaking the things about the kingdom of God.
Acts. And being assembled together, he commanded them not to depart from Jerusalem,  to wait for the promise of the Father, Which, he said, ye heard from me.
Acts. Because John indeed immersed in water,  ye will be immersed in the Holy Spirit after not many of these days.
Acts. Indeed therefore having come together, they questioned him, saying, Lord, do thou restore the kingdom to Israel at this time?
Acts. And he said to them, It is not for you to know times or seasons, which the Father established in his own authority.
Acts. But ye will receive the power of the Holy Spirit that comes upon you. And ye will be witnesses to me both in Jerusalem,  in all Judea and Samaria,  as far as of the extremity of the earth.
Acts. And having said these things, as they were watching, he was taken up,  a cloud received him from their eyes.
Acts. And while they were gazing at his going into the sky, behold, two men had also stood by them in white apparel,
Acts. who also said, Men, Galileans, why stand ye gazing into the sky? This Jesus who was taken up from you into the sky will so come, in that same way as ye saw him going into the sky.
Acts. Then they returned to Jerusalem from the mountain called Olivet, which is near Jerusalem having a sabbath day journey.
Acts. And when they came in, they went up into the upper floor where they were lodging, including, Peter and James and John and Andrew, Philip and Thomas, Bartholomew and Matthew, James the son of Alphaeus,  Simon the Zealot,  Judas son of James.
Acts. All these men were continuing with one accord in prayer and supplication, with women,  Mary the mother of Jesus,  with his brothers.
Acts. And in those days, Peter, having stood up in the midst of the disciples (and there was a multitude of names at the same place, about a hundred twenty), he said,
Acts. Men, brothers, it was necessary for this scripture to be fulfilled, which the Holy Spirit foretold through the mouth of David about Judas, who became a guide to those who arrested Jesus,
Acts. because he was numbered with us,  received a share of this ministry.
Acts. (Indeed therefore this man obtained a field from the reward of his unrighteousness,  having become headlong, he burst open in the middle and all his bowels gushed out.
Acts. And it became known to all those dwelling at Jerusalem, so as to call that field in their own dialect, Akeldama, that is, The field of blood.)
Acts. For it is written in the book of Psalms, Let his habitation become desolate,  let no man be dwelling in it, , Let another take his office.
Acts. It is necessary therefore, of the men who accompanied us during all the time during which the Lord Jesus went in and went out among us,
Acts. having begun from the immersion of John to the day that he was taken up from us, for one of these to become a witness with us of his resurrection.
Acts. And they put forward two, Joseph called Barsabbas, who was surnamed Justus,  Matthias.
Acts. And having prayed, they said, Thou, Lord, knowing the hearts of all men, show which one of these two thou have chosen
Acts. to take the place in this ministry and apostleship from which Judas transgressed to go to his own place.
Acts. And they gave their lots,  the lot fell upon Matthias,  he was numbered with the eleven apostles.
Acts. And while fulfilling the day of Pentecost, they were all together at the same place.
Acts. And suddenly there developed a sound from the sky as of a forceful wind moving,  it filled the entire house where they were sitting.
Acts. And there appeared to them dividing tongues, as of fire,  they settled upon each one of them.
Acts. And they were all filled of the Holy Spirit,  began to speak with other tongues, as the Spirit gave them to declare.
Acts. Now there were dwelling at Jerusalem, Jews, devout men from every nation under heaven.
Acts. And the sound of this that happened brought the multitude together. And it was bewildered because each one heard them speaking in his own language.
Acts. And they were amazed and marveled, saying to each other, Behold, are not all these men who speak Galileans?
Acts. And how do we each hear our own language in which we were born?
Acts. Parthians and Medes and Elamites,  those dwelling in Mesopotamia,  Judea and Cappadocia, Pontus and Asia,
Acts. and Phrygia and Pamphylia, Egypt and the parts of Libya along Cyrene,  those Roman aliens, including Jews and proselytes,
Acts. Cretes and Arabians. We hear them speaking in our tongues the great things of God.
Acts. And they were all amazed,  were perplexed, others saying to others, Whatever does this intend to be?
Acts. But others, mocking said, They are filled of wine.
Acts. But Peter having stood up with the eleven, raised his voice and spoke out to them, saying, Jewish men,  all who dwell at Jerusalem, be this known to you,  listen to my sayings.
Acts. For these men are not drunken, as ye suppose, for it is the third hour of the day.
Acts. But this is that which was spoken through the prophet Joel:
Acts. And it will be in the last days, says God, I will pour out from my Spirit upon all flesh. And your sons and your daughters will prophesy,  your young men will see visions,  your elders will dream dreams.
Acts. And also on my bondmen and on my bondmaids in those days I will pour out from my Spirit,  they will prophesy.
Acts. And I will give wonders in the heaven above,  signs on the earth beneath, blood,  fire,  vapor of smoke.
Acts. The sun will be changed into darkness,  the moon into blood, before that great and wonderful day of the Lord comes.
Acts. And it will be, that every man, whoever may call on the name of the Lord will be saved.
Acts. Men, Israelites, hear ye these words. Jesus the Nazarene, a man shown by God among you by miracles and wonders and signs, which God did by him in the midst of you, as ye yourselves also know,
Acts. this man, having been designated (by the purpose and foreknowledge of God) a man delivered up, ye, having taken by lawless hands, killed, having crucified,
Acts. whom God raised up, having loosed the pangs of death, because it was not possible for him to be held by it.
Acts. For David speaks for him: I beheld the Lord always before me, because he is at my right hand, so that I may not be moved.
Acts. Because of this my heart rejoiced,  my tongue was glad. And moreover my flesh will also rest in hope.
Acts. Because thou will not leave my soul in Hades, nor will thou give thy Holy man to see decay.
Acts. Thou made known to me the paths of life. Thou will fill me of joy with thy countenance.
Acts. Men, brothers, being permitted to speak to you with openness about the patriarch David, that he both perished and was buried,  his sepulcher is with us to this day.
Acts. Being therefore a prophet,  knowing that God had sworn with an oath to him, to raise the Christ from the fruit of his loins according to flesh to sit upon his throne.
Acts. Having foreseen this, he spoke about the resurrection of the Christ, that his soul was not left behind in Hades, nor did his flesh see decay.
Acts. This Jesus, God raised up, of which we are all witnesses.
Acts. Therefore, exalted by the right hand of God,  having received the promise of the Holy Spirit from the Father, he poured out this that ye now see and hear.
Acts. For David did not ascend into the heavens,  he himself says, The Lord said to my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand
Acts. until I place thine enemies a footstool of thy feet.
Acts. Therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly, that God has made him, this Jesus whom ye crucified, both Lord and Christ.
Acts. Now having heard this, they were pierced in the heart,  said to Peter and the other apostles, Men, brothers, what will we do?
Acts. And Peter said to them, Repent ye,  be immersed each of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins,  ye will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit.
Acts. For the promise is to you,  to your children,  to all those in afar, as many as the Lord our God may call.
Acts. And with many more other words he testified and exhorted them, saying, Be saved from this crooked generation.
Acts. Indeed therefore those who received his word gladly, were immersed. And there were added in that day about three thousand souls.
Acts. And they were continuing steadfastly in the apostles doctrine,  in fellowship,  in the breaking of bread,  the prayers.
Acts. And fear developed in every soul. And many wonders and signs occurred through the apostles.
Acts. And all who believed were together,  had all things common.
Acts. And they sold properties and possessions,  divided them to all, according as any man had need.
Acts. And continuing steadfastly, daily with one accord in the temple,  breaking bread from house to house, they partook of nourishment in gladness and evenness of heart,
Acts. praising God,  having favor with the whole populace. And the Lord was adding to the church daily those being saved.
Acts. Now at the same time Peter and John were going up into the temple, at the hour of prayer, the ninth.
Acts. And a certain man, being lame from his mother's belly, was carried, whom they laid daily at the gate of the temple, called Beautiful, to ask charity from those who entered into the temple,
Acts. who, having seen Peter and John intending to go into the temple, asked charity.
Acts. And Peter, having gazed intently at him, with John, said, Look at us.
Acts. And he gave attention to them expecting to receive something from them.
Acts. But Peter said, No silver and gold exists to me,  what I have, this I give thee. In the name of Jesus Christ the Nazarene, rise up and walk.
Acts. And after taking him by the right hand, he lifted him up. And immediately his feet and his ankles were strengthened.
Acts. And leaping up, he stood and walked. And he entered with them into the temple, walking,  leaping,  praising God.
Acts. And all the people saw him walking and praising God,
Acts. and they recognized him, that this was the man who sat for charity at the Beautiful Gate of the temple. And they were filled of astonishment and amazement at that which happened to him.
Acts. And as the lame man who was healed held Peter and John, all the people ran together to them in the porch that is called Solomon's, amazed.
Acts. And Peter having seen, he responded to the people, Men, Israelites, why do ye marvel at this man? Or why do ye stare at us, as by our own power or piety we have made him to walk?
Acts. The God of Abraham,  of Isaac,  of Jacob, the God of our fathers, has glorified his Boy Jesus, whom ye actually delivered up,  denied him in the presence of Pilate who preferred to release that man.
Acts. But ye denied the Holy and Righteous,  asked for a man, a murderer to be granted to you.
Acts. And ye killed the Pathfinder of life, whom God raised from the dead, of which we are witnesses.
Acts. And by faith in his name, this man whom ye see and know, his name has made strong. And faith through him has given him this complete soundness in the presence of you all.
Acts. And now, brothers, I know that ye did it from ignorance, as also your rulers.
Acts. But this way God fulfilled what things were foretold, through the mouth of all his prophets, the Christ was to endure.
Acts. Repent ye therefore,  be converted in order to wipe away your sins, so that times of refreshing may come from the presence of the Lord.
Acts. And he may send Christ Jesus who has been pre-ordained for you,
Acts. whom heaven must indeed receive until the times of restoration of all things, of which God spoke through the mouth of all his holy prophets from the age.
Acts. For Moses indeed said to the fathers, The Lord our God will raise up a prophet for you, from your brothers, like me. Ye shall hear him in all things, as many as he might speak to you.
Acts. And every soul, whichever it will be, if it will not hear that prophet will be utterly destroyed from the people.
Acts. And also all the prophets from Samuel and those in succession, as many as spoke, also proclaimed these days.
Acts. Ye are sons of the prophets,  of the covenant that God made for our fathers, saying to Abraham, And in thy seed all the patriarchies of the earth will be blessed.
Acts. To you first, having raised up his Boy Jesus, God sent him blessing you, in turning away each man from your evils.
Acts. And as they spoke to the people, the priests and the captain of the temple and the Sadducees approached them,
Acts. being greatly annoyed because of their teaching the people,  proclaiming in Jesus the resurrection of the dead.
Acts. And they threw hands on them,  put them in custody for the morrow, for it was now evening.
Acts. But many of those who heard the word believed,  the number of the men became about five thousand.
Acts. And it came to pass on the morrow, to be assembled in Jerusalem, their rulers,  elders,  scholars,
Acts. and Annas the high priest,  Caiaphas,  John,  Alexander,  as many as were of the high priestly family.
Acts. And after placing them in the midst, they inquired, By what power, or in what name, have ye done this?
Acts. Then Peter being filled with the Holy Spirit, said to them, Rulers of the people,  elders of Israel,
Acts. if we are examined today about a good deed, of a feeble man, by what this man has been healed,
Acts. be it known to you all,  to all the people of Israel, that in the name of Jesus Christ the Nazarene, whom ye crucified, whom God raised from the dead, by this, this man stands here before you healthy.
Acts. This is the stone that was rejected by you who build, which became into the head of the corner.
Acts. And salvation is not in any other man, for there is no other name under the heaven, that has been given among men, by which we must be saved.
Acts. Now when they saw the boldness of Peter and John,  having perceived that they are illiterate and uneducated men, they marveled. And they recognized them, that they had been with Jesus.
Acts. And seeing the man who was healed standing with them, they had nothing to contradict.
Acts. But after commanding them to go outside of the council, they conferred among each other,
Acts. saying, What will we do to these men? For that indeed a notable sign has happened by them, is apparent to all who dwell in Jerusalem,  we cannot deny it.
Acts. But that it may not spread on further among the people, let us threaten them with threats to speak no longer in this name, to not one man.
Acts. And having called them, they commanded them entirely, not to utter nor to teach in the name of Jesus.
Acts. But Peter and John having replied to them, they said, Whether it is right in the sight of God to hearken to you rather than God, judge ye.
Acts. For we are not able not to speak what we saw and heard.
Acts. And they, having further threatened, released them, finding nothing how they might punish them, because of the people. Since all glorified God for that which happened.
Acts. For the man was more than forty years old on whom this sign of healing had occurred.
Acts. And after being released, they went to their own men,  reported as many things as the chief priests and the elders said to them.
Acts. And those who heard lifted up a voice to God with one accord,  said, Thou Master, the God who made the heaven and the earth and the sea,  all things in them.
Acts. He who said through the mouth of thy boy David, Why do the nations rage,  the peoples meditate vain things?
Acts. The kings of the earth stood up,  the rulers were gathered together, against the Lord,  against his Christ.
Acts. For in truth, against thy holy Boy Jesus, whom thou anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and the peoples of Israel, were gathered together,
Acts. to do as many things as thy hand and thy purpose predetermined to happen.
Acts. And now, Lord, look upon their threats,  grant to thy bondmen with all boldness to speak thy word,
Acts. by thy stretching forth thy hand for healing,  signs and wonders to happen through the name of thy holy Boy Jesus.
Acts. And when they prayed, the place in which they were assembled was shaken,  they were all filled with the Holy Spirit,  they spoke the word of God with boldness.
Acts. And the multitude of those who believed were of one heart and soul. And not even one man said that anything of the things that was possessed by him was his own,  all things were common to them.
Acts. And with great power the apostles gave back the testimony of the resurrection of the Lord Jesus,  great grace was upon them all.
Acts. For not even any needy was among them, for as many as were owners of lands or houses, selling, they brought the proceeds of the things that were sold,
Acts. and placed them at the apostles' feet. And it was distributed to each, according as any man had need.
Acts. And Joses, who was surnamed by the apostles, Barnabas (which is, being translated, son of encouragement), a Levite, a Cypriot by nationality,
Acts. having sold a field that was possessed by him, brought the money and placed it at the apostles' feet.
Acts. But a certain man named Ananias, with Sapphira his wife, sold property,
Acts. and kept back from the price, his wife also having joint awareness. And having brought a certain part, he placed it at the apostles' feet.
Acts. But Peter said, Ananias, why did Satan fill thy heart for thee to lie to the Holy Spirit,  to keep back from the price of the land?
Acts. While it remained, did it not remain to thee? And after it was sold, it was in thine authority. Why is it that thou have placed this matter in thy heart? Thou have not lied to men,  to God.
Acts. And Ananias hearing these words, after falling down he expired. And great fear developed in all who heard these things.
Acts. And after rising the young men wrapped him,  having carried him out they buried him.
Acts. And it came to pass after an interval of three hours, his wife also came in, not knowing that which happened.
Acts. And Peter responded to her, Tell me whether ye sold the land for so much. And she said, Yes, for so much.
Acts. But Peter said to her, How is it that it was agreed by you to challenge the Spirit of the Lord? Behold, the feet of those who buried thy husband are at the door,  they will carry thee out.
Acts. And immediately she fell down at his feet and expired. And after coming in the young men found her dead,  having carried her out, they buried her by her husband.
Acts. And great fear developed in the whole church,  in all who heard these things.
Acts. And by the hands of the apostles many signs and wonders happened among the people. And they were all with one accord in Solomon's porch.
Acts. But of the rest no man dared join them,  the people magnified them.
Acts. And more who believe were added to the Lord, multitudes both of men and women,
Acts. so as to bring the feeble to the thoroughfares,  to place them on cots and mats, so that while coming, the shadow of Peter might at the least overshadow some of them.
Acts. And also the populace of the cities round about came together to Jerusalem bringing the feeble,  those tormented by unclean spirits, who were all healed.
Acts. But after rising up, the high priest and all those with him (being the sect of the Sadducees) were filled of envy.
Acts. And they threw their hands on the apostles,  put them in the public prison.
Acts. But an agent of the Lord opened the prison doors by night,  after leading them out, he said,
Acts. Go ye,  after standing in the temple, speak to the people all the sayings of this Life.
Acts. And having heard, they entered into the temple at early morning,  taught. But the high priest having arrived,  those with him, they called the council together,  all the senate of the sons of Israel. And they sent to the prison for them to be brought.
Acts. But the subordinates who came did not find them in the prison. And having returned, they reported,
Acts. saying, We found the prison indeed shut in all security,  the guards standing before the doors,  after opening, we found no man inside.
Acts. Now when they heard these words, the high priest,  the captain of the temple,  the chief priests, were perplexed about them, whatever this would become.
Acts. But a certain man who arrived, reported to them, Behold, the men whom ye put in the prison are standing in the temple and teaching the people.
Acts. Then after departing, the captain with the subordinates brought them, not with violence, for they feared the people, lest they would be stoned.
Acts. And having brought them, they placed them in the council. And the high priest demanded them,
Acts. saying, Did we not command by an order for you not to teach in this name? And behold, ye have filled Jerusalem of your doctrine,  intend to bring upon us this man's blood.
Acts. And Peter and the apostles having answered, they said, We must obey God rather than men.
Acts. The God of our fathers raised up Jesus, whom ye murdered, having hung on a tree.
Acts. God exalted this man with his right hand, a Pathfinder and a Savior to give repentance to Israel and remission of sins.
Acts. And we are his witnesses of these things,  also the Holy Spirit whom God has given to those who obey him.
Acts. And when they heard this, they were as being split with a saw,  wanted to annihilate them.
Acts. But after standing up in the council, a certain Pharisee named Gamaliel, a law teacher, esteemed by all the people, commanded to make the apostles be outside a little while.
Acts. And he said to them, Men, Israelites, take heed to yourselves what ye are going to do against these men.
Acts. For before these days Theudas rose up saying himself to be somebody, to whom a number of men, about four hundred, bonded themselves, who was killed. And all, as many as were persuaded by him, were dispersed and developed into nothing.
Acts. After this man Judas the Galilean rose up in the days of the registration,  drew a considerable crowd behind him. That man was also destroyed,  all, as many as were persuaded by him, were scattered.
Acts. And now I say to you, keep away from these men,  let them go, because if the project or this work is from men, it will be overthrown,
Acts. but if it is from God, ye cannot overthrow it,  perhaps ye may be found to be fighting against God.
Acts. And they were persuaded by him. And after summoning the apostles, having beat them, they commanded them not to speak in the name of Jesus,  released them.
Acts. Indeed therefore they departed from the presence of the council, rejoicing that they were considered worthy to be treated shamefully for the name of Jesus.
Acts. And every day, in the temple and from house to house, they ceased not teaching and preaching good news, Jesus, the Christ.
Acts. Now in those days, the disciples being multiplied, there developed a murmuring of the Hellenists against the Hebrews because their widows were neglected in the daily assistance.
Acts. And the twelve, having summoned the multitude of the disciples, they said, It is not right for us, having left the word of God behind, to serve tables.
Acts. Therefore, brothers, seek ye out seven men from you being well reported, full of the Holy Spirit and of wisdom, whom we may appoint over this need.
Acts. But we will continue steadfastly in prayer,  in the service of the word.
Acts. And the word was pleasing before all the multitude. And they chose Stephen, a man full of faith and of the Holy Spirit,  Philip,  Prochorus,  Nicanor,  Timon,  Parmenas,  Nicolas, a proselyte, a citizen of Antioch,
Acts. men whom they placed before the apostles. And having prayed, they laid hands upon them.
Acts. And the word of God increased,  the number of the disciples multiplied greatly in Jerusalem,  a large company of the priests were obedient to the faith.
Acts. And Stephen, full of faith and power, did great wonders and signs among the people.
Acts. But some of those from the synagogue called Libertines,  of the Cyrenians,  of the Alexandrians,  of those from Cilicia and Asia, rose up disputing with Stephen.
Acts. And they were not able to withstand the wisdom and the spirit by which he spoke.
Acts. Then they instigated men who said, We have heard him speaking blasphemous sayings against Moses and God.
Acts. And they incited the people,  the elders,  the scholars. And after approaching, they seized him,  brought him to the council.
Acts. And they put forward false witnesses who said, This man does not cease speaking blasphemous sayings against the holy place,  the law.
Acts. For we have heard him saying that this Jesus the Nazarene will destroy this place,  will change the customs that Moses delivered to us.
Acts. And all who sat in the council, having gazed upon him, saw his face like a face of an agent.
Acts. And the high priest said, Are these things so?
Acts. And he said, Men! Brothers and fathers, listen. The God of glory appeared to our father Abraham when he was in Mesopotamia, before he dwelt in Haran.
Acts. And he said to him, Go forth out of thy land,  from thy kinfolk,  come into a land that I will show thee.
Acts. Then after coming out of the land of the Chaldeans, he dwelt in Haran. And from there, after his father died, God resettled him in this land in which ye now dwell.
Acts. And he gave him no inheritance in it, not even a footstep. And he promised to give it to him for a possession,  to his seed after him, although there was no child by him.
Acts. And God spoke thus: His seed would be alien in a foreign land,  they would enslave and mistreat them four hundred years.
Acts. And I will judge the nation to whomever they will be in bondage, God said,  after these things they will come forth and serve me in this place.
Acts. And he gave him the covenant of circumcision. And so he begot Isaac,  circumcised him the eighth day. And Isaac begot Jacob,  Jacob the twelve patriarchs.
Acts. And the patriarchs, being envious, sold Joseph into Egypt. And God was with him,
Acts. and delivered him out of all his afflictions,  gave him favor and wisdom before Pharaoh king of Egypt. And he appointed him governor over Egypt and his entire house.
Acts. Now a famine came on all Egypt and Canaan,  great affliction,  our fathers found no sustenance.
Acts. But when Jacob heard of grain being in Egypt, he sent forth our fathers the first time.
Acts. And during the second time Joseph was made known to his brothers,  Joseph's race became manifest to Pharaoh.
Acts. And Joseph having sent forth, he summoned Jacob his father. And all his kinfolk, in souls, were seventy-five.
Acts. And Jacob went down into Egypt,  he perished, he and our fathers.
Acts. And they were carried into Shechem,  laid in the sepulcher that Abraham bought for a price of silver from the sons of Hamor of Shechem.
Acts. But as the time of the promise approached that God swore to Abraham, the people grew and multiplied in Egypt,
Acts. until another king arose who had not known Joseph.
Acts. This man, who cunningly victimized our race, mistreated our fathers to make their infants be placed outside in order not to keep alive.
Acts. During which time Moses was born (and he was well-formed by God) who was reared three months in his father's house.
Acts. And when he was exposed, Pharaoh's daughter took him away,  reared him for a son to herself.
Acts. And Moses was reared in all the wisdom of the Egyptians,  he was mighty in his words and deeds.
Acts. But when a forty year time span was fulfilled by him, it came into his heart to go help his brothers, the sons of Israel.
Acts. And after seeing a certain man suffering wrong, he defended him,  did vengeance for the man being oppressed, having smitten the Egyptian.
Acts. And he presumed his brothers understood that, by his hand, God was giving them salvation,  they did not understand.
Acts. And on the next day he was seen by them as they fought,  he was reconciling them for peace, having said, Men, ye are brothers. Why is it that ye wrong each other?
Acts. But the man doing wrong to his neighbor thrust him away, having said, Who appointed thee a ruler and a judge over us?
Acts. Do thou not want to kill me, as thou killed the Egyptian yesterday?
Acts. And Moses fled at this word,  became an alien in the land of Midian, where he begot two sons.
Acts. And forty years having been fulfilled, an agent of the Lord appeared to him in the wilderness of Mount Sinai in a flame of fire of a bush.
Acts. And when Moses looked, he wondered at the sight. And as he approached to examine, a voice of the Lord came to him,
Acts. I am the God of thy fathers, the God of Abraham,  the God of Isaac,  the God of Jacob. But Moses, who developed trembling, dared not examine.
Acts. And the Lord said to him, Put off the shoes from thy feet, for the place on which thou stand is holy ground.
Acts. Having looked, I saw the oppression of my people in Egypt,  I heard their groaning,  I came down to deliver them. And now come, I will send thee into Egypt.
Acts. This Moses whom they refused, having said, Who appointed thee a ruler and a judge? This man God sent, a ruler and a liberator by the hand of the agent who appeared to him in the bush.
Acts. This man brought them forth after performing wonders and signs in the land of Egypt,  in the Red Sea,  in the wilderness forty years.
Acts. This is the Moses who said to the sons of Israel, The Lord our God will raise up a prophet for you, from your brothers, like me.
Acts. This is he who became in the congregation in the wilderness with the agent who spoke to him on the mount Sinai,  of our fathers who received living oracles to give to us.
Acts. To whom our fathers did not want to become obedient,  they thrust away,  turned back in their heart to Egypt,
Acts. after saying to Aaron, Make gods for us who will lead us. For this Moses, who brought us out of the land of Egypt, we know not what has happened to him.
Acts. And they made a calf in those days,  offered up sacrifice to the idol,  rejoiced in the works of their hands.
Acts. But God turned,  gave them over to serve the host of heaven, just as it is written in the book of the prophets, Did ye offer to me slain beasts and sacrifices forty years in the wilderness, O house of Israel?
Acts. And ye took up the tabernacle of Moloch,  the star of your god Remphan, the images that ye made to worship them. And I will deport you beyond Babylon.
Acts. The tabernacle of the testimony was with our fathers in the wilderness, just as he arranged (he who spoke to Moses), to make it according to the pattern that he had seen.
Acts. Which also our fathers, having received in succession, brought in with Joshua into the possession of the nations whom God drove out from the presence of our fathers, until the days of David
Acts. who found favor in the sight of God. And he asked to find a habitation for the God of Jacob.
Acts. But Solomon built him a house.
Acts. However the Most High does not dwell in man-made temples, just as the prophet says,
Acts. The heaven is to me a throne,  the earth a footstool of my feet. What house will ye build for me? says the Lord. Or what is the place of my rest?
Acts. Did not my hand make all these things?
Acts. Ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do always resist the Holy Spirit. As your fathers, ye also.
Acts. Which of the prophets did your fathers not persecute? And they killed those who foretold about the coming of the Righteous man, of whom ye now have become betrayers and murderers,
Acts. who received the law at directions of agents,  did not keep it.
Acts. Now when they heard these things, they were split with a saw in their hearts,  they gnashed their teeth against him.
Acts. But being full of the Holy Spirit, having gazed into heaven, he saw the glory of God,  Jesus standing at the right hand of God.
Acts. And he said, Look, I see the heavens opened,  the Son of Man standing at the right hand of God.
Acts. But they, having cried out in a great voice, held their ears shut,  rushed upon him with one accord.
Acts. And having expelled him out of the city, they stoned him. And the witnesses laid down their garments beside the feet of a young man called Saul.
Acts. And they stoned Stephen, who was calling and saying, Lord Jesus, receive my spirit.
Acts. And having knelt down, he cried out in a great voice, Lord, place not this sin to them. And after saying this, he slept.
Acts. And Saul was approving the killing of him. And on that day there developed a great persecution against the church at Jerusalem. And they were all scattered throughout the regions of Judea and Samaria, except the apostles.
Acts. And devout men arranged to bury Stephen,  they made great lamentation over him.
Acts. But Saul was ravaging the church, entering from house to house. Dragging both men and women, he gave them over to prison.
Acts. Indeed therefore those who were scattered abroad passed through proclaiming the good news, the word.
Acts. And Philip, who went down to a city of Samaria, proclaimed the Christ to them.
Acts. And the multitudes unanimously heeded the things that were spoken by Philip during their listening and seeing the signs that he did.
Acts. For of many of those who had unclean spirits, they came out, crying in a great voice. And many who were paralyzed,  who were lame, were healed.
Acts. And there became great joy in that city.
Acts. But a certain man in the city, Simon by name, was formerly practicing sorcery,  fascinating the nation of Samaria, saying himself to be some great man,
Acts. to whom they gave heed, from small to great, saying, This man is the great power of God.
Acts. And they heeded him, because he fascinated them for a considerable time with the sorceries.
Acts. But when they believed Philip preaching good news, the things about the kingdom of God and the name of Jesus Christ, they were immersed, both men and women.
Acts. And Simon himself also believed. And after being immersed, he was continuing with Philip. And seeing miracles and signs occurring, he was astonished.
Acts. Now when the apostles at Jerusalem heard that Samaria has received the word of God, they sent Peter and John to them,
Acts. who, when they came down, prayed for them, so that they might receive the Holy Spirit,
Acts. for it was not yet fallen upon any of them. They were only immersed in the name of the Christ Jesus.
Acts. Then they laid hands on them,  they received the Holy Spirit.
Acts. Now when Simon saw that the Holy Spirit was given through the laying on of the apostles' hands, he brought money to them,
Acts. saying, Give me also this power, so that on whomever I lay hands, he may receive the Holy Spirit.
Acts. But Peter said to him, Thy silver with thee, may it be for destruction, because thou thought to obtain the gift of God by money.
Acts. There is no part nor lot for thee in this matter, for thy heart is not straight in the sight of God.
Acts. Repent therefore from this thine evil,  beg God, if perhaps the thought of thy heart will be forgiven thee.
Acts. For I perceive that thou are in the gall of bitterness and the bond of unrighteousness.
Acts. And having answered, Simon said, Beg ye to the Lord for me, so that none of which things ye have spoken may come upon me.
Acts. Indeed therefore, having solemnly testified and spoken the word of the Lord, they returned to Jerusalem,  preached the good news in many villages of the Samaritans.
Acts. And an agent of the Lord spoke to Philip, saying, Arise,  go toward the south to the road that goes down from Jerusalem to Gaza. This is a desolate region.
Acts. And after rising, he went. And behold a man, an Ethiopian, a eunuch, a high official of Candace the queen of the Ethiopians, who was over all her treasure, who had come to Jerusalem to worship.
Acts. And he was returning,  sitting in his chariot,  reading the prophet Isaiah.
Acts. And the Spirit said to Philip, Go near,  be joined to this chariot.
Acts. And after running near, Philip heard him reading the prophet Isaiah. And he said, Do thou also really understand the things that thou read?
Acts. And he said, For how can I unless some man may guide me? And he encouraged Philip, after coming up, to sit with him.
Acts. Now the passage of the scripture that he was reading was this: He was led as a sheep to slaughter,  as a lamb, mute before shearing him, thus he opened not his mouth.
Acts. In his lowly condition his justice was taken away. And who will describe his generation, because his life was taken from the earth?
Acts. And having answered, the eunuch said to Philip, I ask thee, about whom does the prophet say this, about himself, or about some other man?
Acts. And Philip having opened his mouth,  having begun from this scripture, he preached the good news to him-the man Jesus.
Acts. And as they went on the way, they came to some water,  the eunuch says, Look, water! What prevents me to be immersed?
Acts. [This verse in not in the majority of the Greek manuscripts.]
Acts. And he commanded the chariot to stand still. And they both went down into the water, both Philip and the eunuch,  he immersed him.
Acts. And when they came up out of the water, Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip,  the eunuch saw him no more, for he went on his way rejoicing.
Acts. But Philip was found at Azotus. And passing through all the cities he preached the good news until he came to Caesarea.
Acts. But Saul, still breathing threat and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord, after going to the high priest,
Acts. he requested letters from him for Damascus, to the synagogues, so that if he found any who were of the Way, both men and women, he might bring them bound to Jerusalem.
Acts. And on going, it came to pass for him to approach Damascus. And suddenly there shone around him a light out of heaven.
Acts. And after falling to the ground, he heard a voice saying to him, Saul, Saul, why do thou persecute me?
Acts. And he said, Who are thou, Lord? And the Lord said, I am Jesus whom thou persecute.
Acts. But arise,  enter into the city,  it will be told thee what thou must do.
Acts. And the men who traveled with him had stopped, speechless, indeed hearing the voice,  seeing no man.
Acts. And Saul arose from the ground. And when his eyes were opened, he saw no man. But they brought him into Damascus, leading him by the hand.
Acts. And he was three days not seeing,  did not eat or drink.
Acts. Now there was a certain disciple in Damascus, named Ananias,  the Lord said to him in a vision, Ananias. And he said, Behold me, Lord.
Acts. And the Lord said to him, After rising, go into the street called Straight,  seek in the house of Judas, a man named Saul of Tarsus, for behold, he is praying.
Acts. And he saw in a vision a man named Ananias who came in and laid a hand on him, so that he might receive sight.
Acts. But Ananias answered, Lord, I have heard from many about this man, how many evil things he did to thy sanctified at Jerusalem.
Acts. And here he has authority from the chief priests to bind all who call upon thy name.
Acts. But the Lord said to him, Go, because this man is a chosen vessel to me, to bear my name before Gentiles and kings,  sons of Israel.
Acts. For I will give him a glimpse of how many things it is necessary for him to suffer for my name.
Acts. And Ananias departed and entered into the house. And having laid hands on him he said, Brother Saul, the Lord, he who appeared to thee on the road on which thou came, has sent me so that thou may receive sight,  be filled of the Holy Spirit.
Acts. And straightaway there fell from his eyes, like scales,  he looked up. And immediately after rising up, he was immersed.
Acts. And having received nourishment, he was strengthened. And Saul became with the disciples in Damascus some days.
Acts. And straightaway he proclaimed the Christ in the synagogues, that this man is the Son of God.
Acts. And all those who heard were amazed,  said, Is this not the man who destroyed those in Jerusalem who call on this name? And he has come here for this, so that he might bring them bound to the chief priests.
Acts. But Saul was strengthened more,  was confounding the Jews who dwell at Damascus, proving that this is the Christ.
Acts. And after considerable days were fulfilled, the Jews plotted to destroy him,
Acts. but their plot was known to Saul. And they watched the gates both day and night so that they might destroy him.
Acts. But the disciples, after taking him by night, let him down through the wall, having lowered him in a hamper.
Acts. And when Saul arrived in Jerusalem, he attempted to join with the disciples,  they all feared him, not believing that he is a disciple.
Acts. But Barnabas having taken him, he brought him to the apostles. And he related to them how he saw the Lord on the road,  that he spoke to him,  how he spoke boldly at Damascus in the name of Jesus.
Acts. And he was with them coming in and going out at Jerusalem,  speaking boldly in the name of the Lord Jesus.
Acts. And he spoke and disputed against the Hellenists,  they attempted to destroy him.
Acts. But when the brothers knew it, they brought him down to Caesarea,  sent him away to Tarsus.
Acts. Indeed therefore the congregations throughout the whole of Judea and Galilee and Samaria had peace, being edified. And, going in the fear of the Lord and in the encouragement of the Holy Spirit, they were multiplied.
Acts. And it came to pass, Peter, passing through all parts, to also come down to the sanctified who dwell at Lydda.
Acts. And he found there a certain man named Aeneas, who was paralyzed, laying on a bed for eight years.
Acts. And Peter said to him, Aeneas, Jesus the Christ heals thee. Arise and make thy bed. And straightaway he arose.
Acts. And all those dwelling at Lydda and Sharon who saw him, turned to the Lord.
Acts. Now at Joppa there was a certain disciple named Tabitha, which, being translated, is called Dorcas. This woman was full of good works and charities that she did.
Acts. And in those days, having been ill, she happened to die. And after washing her, they laid her in an upper chamber.
Acts. And since Lydda is near Joppa, the disciples, having heard that Peter is in it, they sent two men to him, exhorting him not to delay to go through to them.
Acts. And after rising, Peter went with them, whom, after coming, they brought into the upper chamber. And all the widows stood by him weeping,  exhibiting the coats and garments, as many things as Dorcas made being with them.
Acts. But Peter, having sent them all out, having knelt down, he prayed. And having turned to the body, he said, Tabitha, arise. And the woman opened her eyes. And when she saw Peter, she sat up.
Acts. And having given her a hand, he raised her up. And after calling the sanctified and the widows, he presented her alive.
Acts. And it became known throughout the whole of Joppa,  many believed in the Lord.
Acts. And it came to pass for him to remain considerable days at Joppa with a certain Simon, a tanner.
Acts. Now a certain man was in Caesarea, Cornelius by name, a centurion of the band called Italian,
Acts. a devout man,  fearing God with all his house,  doing many charities for the people,  beseeching God always.
Acts. He saw plainly in a vision about the ninth hour of the day, an agent of God coming in to him,  saying to him, Cornelius.
Acts. And after gazing at him,  having become afraid, he said, What is it, Lord? And he said to him, Thy prayers and thy charities have come up for a memorial before God.
Acts. And now send men to Joppa and summon Simon, who is surnamed Peter.
Acts. This man lodges with a certain Simon, a tanner, whose house is beside the seaside.
Acts. And when the agent speaking to Cornelius departed, having called two of his housemen,  a devout soldier of those who personally served him,
Acts. and after reporting all things to them, he sent them to Joppa.
Acts. Now on the morrow, while those men were traveling and approaching the city, Peter went up upon the housetop to pray, about the sixth hour.
Acts. And he became very hungry and wanted to eat. But while those men prepared, a trance fell upon him.
Acts. And he sees heaven opened,  a certain container descending to him, like a great sheet bound at four corners,  being lowered to the earth,
Acts. in which were all the four-footed things of the earth,  the wild beasts,  the creeping things,  the birds of the sky.
Acts. And a voice came to him, After rising, Peter, kill and eat.
Acts. But Peter said, Not so, Lord, because I have never eaten anything profane or unclean.
Acts. And a voice again for a second time, What God has cleansed, thou shall not make profane.
Acts. And this happened thrice,  again the vessel was taken up into heaven.
Acts. Now while Peter was bewildered in himself whatever the vision which he saw might be, that lo, the men who were sent from Cornelius, having inquired the house of Simon, stood at the gate.
Acts. And after calling out they asked whether Simon, who was surnamed Peter, lodges here.
Acts. And while Peter thought about the vision, the Spirit said to him, Behold, men seek thee.
Acts. But after rising, go down,  go with them, doubting nothing, because I have sent them.
Acts. And having gone down to the men, Peter said, Behold, I am he whom ye seek. What is the cause for which ye are here?
Acts. And they said, Cornelius, a centurion, a righteous man,  fearing God,  being well testified by the whole nation of the Jews, was divinely warned by a holy agent to summon thee to his house,  to hear sayings from thee.
Acts. So, having invited them in, he lodged them. And on the morrow Peter went forth with them,  certain of the brothers from Joppa went with him.
Acts. And on the morrow they entered into Caesarea. And Cornelius was waiting for them, having called together his kinsmen and close friends.
Acts. And when it came about for Peter to enter, Cornelius, having met him, after falling down at his feet, worshiped.
Acts. But Peter lifted him up, saying, Stand up. I am also myself a man.
Acts. And as he conversed with him, he went in and found many who came together.
Acts. And he said to them, Ye understand how it is unlawful for a Jewish man to fraternize or to visit with a foreign man,  yet God demonstrated to me not to call one man profane or unclean.
Acts. And so I came without objection when summoned. I ask therefore for what matter ye summoned me.
Acts. And Cornelius said, Four days ago I was fasting until this hour,  the ninth hour praying in my house. And behold, a man stood before me in bright apparel.
Acts. And he says, Cornelius, thy prayer was heard,  thy charities are remembered before God.
Acts. Send therefore to Joppa,  summon Simon, who is surnamed Peter. This man lodges in the house of Simon, a tanner, beside the sea, who, after coming, will speak to thee.
Acts. Immediately therefore I sent to thee,  thou did well having come. Now therefore we are all present in the sight of God, to hear all the things commanded thee by God.
Acts. And having opened his mouth, Peter said, In truth, I am overwhelmed that God is not partial,
Acts. but in every nation, he who fears him,  works righteousness, is acceptable to him.
Acts. The word that he sent forth to the sons of Israel, preaching good news, peace by Jesus Christ (this man is Lord of all),
Acts. ye know, the word having occurred throughout the whole of Judea beginning from Galilee after the immersion that John preached-
Acts. Jesus of Nazareth-how God anointed him with the Holy Spirit and with power, who passed through doing good,  healing all those who were oppressed by the devil, because God was with him.
Acts. And we are witnesses of all that he did both in the country of the Jews,  in Jerusalem, whom also they killed, having hung on a tree.
Acts. This man God raised up the third day,  granted him to become manifest,
Acts. not to all the people,  to witnesses who were previously chosen by God, to us, who ate and drank with him after he arose from the dead.
Acts. And he commanded us to preach to the people,  to solemnly testify that this is the man designated by God, judge of the living and the dead.
Acts. To this man all the prophets testify, that every man who believes in him, to receive remission of sins through his name.
Acts. While Peter still spoke these sayings, the Holy Spirit fell on all those who heard the word.
Acts. And the faithful men of circumcision were astonished, as many as came with Peter, because also on the Gentiles the gift of the Holy Spirit was poured out.
Acts. For they heard them speaking in tongues and magnifying God. Then Peter answered,
Acts. Can any man forbid the water for these not to be immersed, who have received the Holy Spirit as we also?
Acts. And he commanded them to be immersed in the name of the Lord. Then they asked him to remain some days.
Acts. Now the apostles and the brothers who were in Judea heard that the Gentiles also received the word of God.
Acts. And when Peter came up to Jerusalem, the men of circumcision contended against him,
Acts. saying, Thou went in to uncircumcised men, having also eaten with them.
Acts. But when Peter began, he expounded to them in order, saying,
Acts. I was in the city of Joppa praying,  in a trance I saw a vision, a certain container descending, as a great sheet being lowered from heaven by four corners,  it came as far as to me,
Acts. having gazed at which, I was examining. And I saw the four footed things of the earth,  the wild beasts,  the creeping things,  the birds of the sky.
Acts. And I heard a voice saying to me, Having risen, Peter, kill and eat.
Acts. But I said, Not so, Lord, because nothing profane or unclean has ever entered into my mouth.
Acts. But a voice answered me for a second time out of heaven, What God has cleansed, thou shall not make profane.
Acts. And this happened thrice,  all were drawn up again into heaven.
Acts. And behold, immediately three men stood at the house in which I was, who were sent from Caesarea to me.
Acts. And the Spirit told me to go with them, doubting nothing. And these six brothers also went with me,  we entered into the man's house.
Acts. And he informed us how he saw the agent in his house, who stood and said to him, Send forth men to Joppa,  summon Simon, the man surnamed Peter,
Acts. who will speak sayings to thee, by which thou will be saved, thou and all thy house.
Acts. And as I began to speak, the Holy Spirit fell on them, just as also on us at the beginning.
Acts. And I remembered the saying of the Lord, how he said, John indeed immersed in water,  ye will be immersed in the Holy Spirit.
Acts. If then God gave to them the identical gift as also to us who believed in the Lord Jesus Christ,  what power was I to hinder God?
Acts. And when they heard these things, they relaxed and glorified God, saying, Then God has also granted to the Gentiles repentance to life.
Acts. Indeed therefore those who were scattered abroad from the persecution that occurred against Stephen passed through as far as Phoenicia and Cyprus and Antioch, speaking the word to none except Jews only.
Acts. And some of them were men, Cyprians and Cyrenians, who, having come to Antioch, spoke to the Hellenists, preaching good news, the Lord Jesus.
Acts. And the hand of the Lord was with them,  a great number who believed turned to the Lord.
Acts. And the word about them was heard in the ears of the church at Jerusalem,  they dispatched Barnabas to pass through as far as Antioch,
Acts. who, having arrived,  having seen the grace of God, rejoiced. And he encouraged all, with purpose of heart, to remain in the Lord.
Acts. Because he was a good man,  full of the Holy Spirit and of faith. And a considerable multitude was added to the Lord.
Acts. And Barnabas departed to Tarsus to seek Saul,
Acts. and when he found him, he brought him to Antioch. And it came to pass a whole year for them to be assembled in the congregation,  to teach a considerable multitude,  to call the disciples Christians, first at Antioch.
Acts. Now in these days prophets came down from Jerusalem to Antioch.
Acts. And one of them named Agabus, after standing up, signified by the Spirit there was going be a great famine in the whole world, which also happened under Claudius Caesar.
Acts. And the disciples, as any man prospered, determined, each of them regarding aid, to send to the brothers who dwell in Judea,
Acts. which also they did, having sent it to the elders by the hand of Barnabas and Saul.
Acts. Now about that time Herod the king threw on hands to harm some of those from the church.
Acts. And he killed James the brother of John with the sword.
Acts. And after seeing that it was pleasing the Jews, he proceeded to arrest Peter also (and those were the days of unleavened bread),
Acts. whom, having also arrested, he put in prison, having delivered to four quaternions of soldiers to guard him, intending after the Passover to bring him forth to the people.
Acts. Indeed therefore Peter was kept in the prison,  fervent prayer was being made by the church to God for him.
Acts. And when Herod was about to bring him forth, that night Peter was sleeping between two soldiers, bound by two chains. And guards in front of the door guarded the prison.
Acts. And behold, an agent of the Lord stood near,  light shone in the room. And after striking the side of Peter, he raised him up, saying, Get up quickly. And his chains fell off from his hands.
Acts. And the agent said to him, Gird thyself,  tie on thy sandals. And he did so. And he says to him, Throw on thy garment,  follow me.
Acts. And after going out, he followed him. And he had not seen that the thing happening by the agent was true,  presumed to see a vision.
Acts. And when they passed a first and a second watch, they came to the iron gate, the one leading to the city, which opened spontaneously to them. And after going out, they advanced one street. And straightaway the agent withdrew from him.
Acts. And when Peter came to himself, he said, Now I know truly, that the Lord dispatched his agent and delivered me out of the hand of Herod and all the expectation of the people of the Jews.
Acts. And having realized it, he came to the house of Mary the mother of John, surnamed Mark, where a considerable were gathered and praying.
Acts. And when Peter knocked the door of the gate, a servant girl named Rhoda came to hearken.
Acts. And after recognizing Peter's voice, she did not open the gate for joy,  having ran in, she reported Peter was standing in front of the gate.
Acts. And they said to her, Thou are mad. But she insisted to have it so. But they said, It is his agent.
Acts. But Peter continued knocking,  when they opened, they saw him,  were astonished.
Acts. But after motioning to them with the hand to be silent, he described to them how the Lord brought him out of the prison. And he said, Report these things to James,  to the brothers. And having departed, he went to a different place.
Acts. But having become day, there was no small stir among the soldiers what then became of Peter.
Acts. And Herod, who sought for him,  not having found, having examined the guards, he commanded them to be led away. And going down from Judea to Caesarea, he remained there.
Acts. Now Herod was angry at the Tyrians and Sidonians. But they came with one accord to him, , having persuaded Blastus the man over the king's bedchamber, they requested peace, because their country was sustained from the monarchy.
Acts. And at a set day Herod, having arrayed himself in royal apparel,  having sat on the tribunal, he made an oration to them.
Acts. And the populace shouted, The voice of a god,  not of a man.
Acts. And immediately an agent of the Lord struck him, because he did not give glory to God. And after becoming worm-eaten, he expired.
Acts. But the word of God grew and multiplied.
Acts. And Barnabas and Saul turned back in Jerusalem after fulfilling the service, also having taken along John who was surnamed Mark.
Acts. Now there were some men from the congregation that was in Antioch, prophets and teachers, including Barnabas,  Simeon called Niger,  Lucius the Cyrenian,  Manaen reared with Herod the tetrarch,  Saul.
Acts. And while they were serving the Lord,  fasting, the Holy Spirit said, Separate to me now Barnabas and Saul for the work that I have called them.
Acts. Then, having fasted and prayed and laid hands on them, they sent them away.
Acts. Indeed therefore these men, having been sent forth by the Holy Spirit, went down to Seleucia,  from there they sailed for Cyprus.
Acts. And after becoming in Salamis, they proclaimed the word of God in the synagogues of the Jews,  they also had John for a helper.
Acts. And after going through the island as far as Paphos, they found a certain sorcerer, a Jewish false prophet, whose name was Bar-jesus,
Acts. who was with the proconsul, Sergius Paulus, an intelligent man. This man, having summoned Barnabas and Saul, sought to hear the word of God.
Acts. But Elymas the sorcerer (for so his name is translated) opposed them, seeking to deviate the proconsul from the faith.
Acts. But Saul (the man is also Paul) having been filled with the Holy Spirit,  having gazed on him,
Acts. said, O man full of all deceit and all recklessness, thou son of the devil, thou enemy of all righteousness, will thou not cease distorting the straight ways of the Lord?
Acts. And now, behold, a hand of the Lord is upon thee,  thou will be blind, not seeing the sun until a time. And immediately there fell on him gloom and darkness,  going around he sought hand-guides.
Acts. Then the proconsul, who saw that which happened, believed, being astonished at the doctrine of the Lord.
Acts. Now those around Paul, having launched from Paphos, they came to Perga in Pamphylia. But John, having departed from them, returned to Jerusalem.
Acts. And they, having passed through from Perga, arrived at Antioch of Pisidia,  after entering into the synagogue on the sabbath day, they sat down.
Acts. And after the reading of the law and the prophets the synagogue rulers sent to them, saying, Men, brothers, if there is among you a word of exhortation for the people, speak.
Acts. And Paul having stood up,  having motioned with the hand, he said, Men! Israelites and those who fear God, listen.
Acts. The God of this people Israel chose our fathers,  raised up the people during the sojourn in the land of Egypt. And with a lofty arm he brought them out of it.
Acts. And for about a forty-year time he was patient with them in the wilderness.
Acts. And having destroyed seven nations in the land of Canaan, he allotted their land to them.
Acts. And after these things he gave them judges about four hundred and fifty years until Samuel the prophet.
Acts. And afterward they asked for a king,  God gave them Saul the son of Kish, a man of the tribe of Benjamin, for forty years.
Acts. And having removed him, he raised up David for a king to them, also about whom he said, when he testified, I have found David the son of Jesse, a man according to my heart, who will do all my purposes.
Acts. From this man's seed according to promise, God brought salvation to Israel,
Acts. John having earlier proclaimed, before his coming presence, the immersion of repentance to Israel.
Acts. And as John was fulfilling his course, he said, Whom do ye suppose me to be? I am not,  behold, he comes after me of whom I am not worthy to loose the shoes of his feet.
Acts. Men, brothers, sons of the race of Abraham,  those among you who fear God, to you the word of this salvation was sent.
Acts. For those who dwell in Jerusalem,  their rulers, not having known this and the voices of the prophets being read at every sabbath, they fulfilled, having condemned him.
Acts. And not having found one cause of death in him, they asked for Pilate to kill him.
Acts. And when they completed all the things written about him, having taken him down from the tree, they laid him in a tomb.
Acts. But God raised him from the dead,
Acts. who was seen for more days by those who came up with him from Galilee to Jerusalem, who are witnesses of him to the people.
Acts. And we proclaim good news to you: the promise to the fathers, which happened because God has fulfilled this to us their children, having raised up Jesus,
Acts. as also it is written in the second psalm, Thou are my Son, today I have begotten thee.
Acts. And because he raised him from the dead, no longer going to return to decay, he has spoken this way: I will give to you the faithful holy things of David.
Acts. Therefore also he says in another, Thou will not give thy Holy Man to see decay.
Acts. For indeed David, who served his own generation in the plan of God, became asleep,  was added near his fathers,  saw decay.
Acts. But he whom God raised up saw no decay.
Acts. Be it known to you therefore, men, brothers, that through this man remission of sins is proclaimed to you.
Acts. And from all things of which ye could not be make righteous by the law of Moses, in this man every man who believes is made righteous.
Acts. Watch therefore, lest that which is spoken in the prophets should come upon you:
Acts. Behold, ye scoffers,  wonder,  perish, because I work a work in your days, which ye would, no, not believe, if some man should fully narrate it to you.
Acts. And as they went out from the synagogue of the Jews, the Gentiles urged that these sayings be spoken to them the next sabbath.
Acts. Now after the synagogue was dismissed, many of the Jews and of the devout proselytes followed Paul and Barnabas, who, while conversing, persuaded them to continue in the grace of God.
Acts. And on the coming sabbath almost all the city was assembled to hear the word of God.
Acts. But when the Jews saw the multitudes, they were filled of envy,  contradicted the things spoken by Paul, contradicting and slandering.
Acts. But having spoken boldly, Paul and Barnabas said, It was necessary for the word of God to be spoken first to you,  since ye thrust it away,  judge yourselves unworthy of eternal life, lo, we turn to the Gentiles.
Acts. For so the Lord has commanded us: I have placed thee for a light of Gentiles, for thee to be for salvation as far as the extremity of the earth.
Acts. And hearing this, the Gentiles were glad and glorified the word of the Lord. And as many as were appointed for eternal life believed.
Acts. And the word of the Lord was spread abroad through the whole region.
Acts. But the Jews incited the religious women,  the prominent women,  the principle men of the city,  raised up a persecution against Paul and Barnabas. And they threw them out of their boundaries.
Acts. But after shaking off the dust of their feet against them, they came to Iconium.
Acts. And the disciples were filled with joy and the Holy Spirit.
Acts. And it came to pass in Iconium according to the same thing, for them to enter into the synagogue of the Jews,  to speak so as for a great quantity to believe, both of Jews and of Greeks.
Acts. But the disobedient Jews aroused the souls of the Gentiles,  made them evil against the brothers.
Acts. Indeed therefore they remained a considerable time speaking boldly in the Lord-him testifying to the word of his grace, granting signs and wonders to occur by their hands.
Acts. But the majority of the city was divided,  verily there were those with the Jews,  those with the apostles.
Acts. And as a violent movement developed, both of the Gentiles and of the Jews, with their rulers, to denounce and to stone them,
Acts. having become aware of it, they fled to the cities of Lycaonia, Lystra,  Derbe,  the neighboring region.
Acts. And there they were preaching the good news.
Acts. And a certain man was sitting in Lystra, disabled in his feet, being a cripple from his mother's belly, who had never walked.
Acts. This man was listening to Paul speaking, who, having gazed at him,  having seen that he has faith to be healed,
Acts. said with a great voice, Stand correctly on thy feet. And he leaped up and walked.
Acts. And the multitudes who saw what Paul did, lifted up their voice, speaking Lycaonian, The gods came down to us, having become like men.
Acts. And they actually called Barnabas, Zeus,  Paul, Hermes, because he was the man who led the word.
Acts. And the priest of Zeus, being in front of their city, after bringing oxen and garlands to the gates, wanted to sacrifice with the multitudes.
Acts. But when the apostles, Barnabas and Paul, heard, having torn their garments, they rushed into the crowd, crying out
Acts. and saying, Men, why are ye doing these things? We also are men of like nature with you, proclaiming good news to you, to turn from these vain things to the living God, who made the heaven and the earth and the sea,  all the things in them,
Acts. who in the generations that have passed allowed all the nations to go in their own ways,
Acts. although he did not leave himself without evidence, doing good and giving you rains from heaven and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts of food and gladness.
Acts. And saying these things, they scarcely restrained the multitudes not to sacrifice to them.
Acts. But Jews came from Antioch and Iconium. And having persuaded the crowds,  having stoned Paul, they dragged him out of the city, after presuming him to be dead.
Acts. But the disciples having surrounded him, after rising, he came into the city. And on the morrow he departed with Barnabas to Derbe.
Acts. And having preached the good news to that city,  having made considerable disciples, they returned to Lystra,  to Iconium,  to Antioch,
Acts. strengthening the souls of the disciples, exhorting them to continue in the faith,  that it was necessary for us to enter into the kingdom of God through many tribulations.
Acts. And having appointed elders for them in every congregation, having prayed with fasting, they entrusted them to the Lord, in whom they had believed.
Acts. And after passing through Pisidia, they came to Pamphylia.
Acts. And when they spoke the word in Perga, they went down to Attalia,
Acts. and from there they sailed to Antioch, from where they were delivered to the grace of God for the work that they fulfilled.
Acts. And after arriving,  after gathering the assembly together, they reported as many things as God did with them,  that he opened a door of faith to the Gentiles.
Acts. And they remained there no little time with the disciples.
Acts. And certain men, who came down from Judea, taught the brothers, Unless ye will be circumcised in the custom of Moses, ye cannot be saved.
Acts. Therefore, no small dissension and debate having developed with Paul and Barnabas against them, they appointed Paul and Barnabas,  some other men from them, to go up to Jerusalem to the apostles and elders in Jerusalem about this issue.
Acts. Indeed therefore, having been helped for the trip by the congregation, they passed through Phoenicia and Samaria, describing the conversion of the Gentiles. And they caused great joy to all the brothers.
Acts. And after arriving in Jerusalem, they were received by the church and the apostles and the elders. And they reported as many things as God did with them.
Acts. But some of the men who believed from the sect of the Pharisees rose up, saying, It is necessary to circumcise them,  to command them to keep the law of Moses.
Acts. And the apostles and the elders were assembled together to see about this matter.
Acts. And when much debate occurred, Peter having risen up, he said to them, Men, brothers, ye know that from past days among us, God chose the Gentiles to hear through my mouth the word of the good news,  to believe.
Acts. And God, who knows the heart, testified to them, having given them the Holy Spirit, just as also to us.
Acts. And he made not one distinction between both us and them, having purified their hearts by faith.
Acts. Now therefore why do ye challenge God, to place a yoke upon the neck of the disciples, which neither our fathers nor we were able to bear?
Acts. But through the grace of the Lord Jesus, we believe to be saved, in the same way as those men also.
Acts. And all the multitude kept silent,  they heard Barnabas and Paul describing how many signs and wonders God did among the Gentiles through them.
Acts. And after they were quiet, James answered, saying, Men, brothers, hear me.
Acts. Simeon described how God first came to help, to take from the Gentiles a people for his name.
Acts. And to this the words of the prophets agree, as it is written,
Acts. After these things I will return,  I will rebuild the tabernacle of David that has fallen. And I will rebuild the things of it that have been demolished,  I will restore it,
Acts. so that the rest of men might seek the Lord,  all the Gentiles upon whom my name is called upon them, says the Lord, who does these things.
Acts. Known to God from the age are all his works.
Acts. Therefore I judge not to trouble those from the Gentiles who are turning to God,
Acts. but to write to them, to abstain from the pollutions of idols,  from fornication,  from what is strangled,  from blood.
Acts. For Moses from generations past, has from city to city those who preach him, being read in the synagogues on every sabbath.
Acts. Then it was decided by the apostles and the elders, with the whole assembly, to send men chosen from them to Antioch with Paul and Barnabas, namely, Judas called Barsabbas,  Silas, leading men among the brothers,
Acts. after writing by their hand these things: The apostles,  the elders,  the brothers, to those down in Antioch and Syria and Cilicia, to the brothers of the Gentiles, greeting.
Acts. Since we have heard that certain men who went out from us have troubled you with words, disturbing your souls, saying to be circumcised,  to keep the law, to whom we did not command,
Acts. it was decided by us, having become unanimous, to send chosen men to you with our beloved Barnabas and Paul,
Acts. men who have given over their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Acts. We have therefore sent Judas and Silas, themselves also declaring the same things by speech.
Acts. For it was decided by the Holy Spirit,  by us, to lay upon you not one greater burden than these necessary things:
Acts. to abstain from things sacrificed to idols,  from blood,  from things strangled,  from fornication, keeping yourselves from which, ye will do well. Be strong.
Acts. Indeed therefore after being dismissed, they came to Antioch,  having gathered the multitude together, they delivered the letter.
Acts. And after reading it, they rejoiced for the encouragement.
Acts. And Judas and Silas, being themselves also prophets, exhorted the brothers by much speech,  strengthened them.
Acts. And after spending some time, they were dismissed with peace from the brothers to the apostles.
Acts. [This verse is not in the majority of the Greek manuscripts.]
Acts. But Paul and Barnabas continued in Antioch, teaching and preaching good news, the word of the Lord, with many others also.
Acts. And after some days Paul said to Barnabas, After returning, surely we could help our brothers in every city in which we proclaimed the word of the Lord, how they fare.
Acts. And Barnabas wanted to take along John called Mark.
Acts. But Paul thought it not worthy to bring along this man who withdrew from them from Pamphylia,  not having gone with them to the work.
Acts. Therefore a provocation developed, so as for them to separate from each other,  Barnabas to sail for Cyprus, after taking Mark,
Acts. but Paul, having selected Silas, went forth after being delivered to the grace of God by the brothers.
Acts. And he passed through Syria and Cilicia, encouraging the congregations.
Acts. And he came to Derbe and to Lystra. And behold, a certain disciple was there, named Timothy, the son of a certain faithful Jewish woman,  of a Greek father,
Acts. who was well reported of by the brothers at Lystra and Iconium.
Acts. Paul wanted this man to go forth with him. And having taken him, he circumcised him because of the Jews who were in those regions, for they had all seen that his father was a Greek.
Acts. And as they were going through the cities, they delivered to them the decrees to keep, which were determined by the apostles and elders at Jerusalem.
Acts. Indeed therefore the congregations were strengthened in the faith,  increased in number daily.
Acts. But having passed through the region of Phrygia and Galatia, having been forbidden by the Holy Spirit to speak the word in Asia,
Acts. having come toward Mysia, they attempted to go toward Bithynia. And the Spirit did not allow them.
Acts. And after passing by Mysia, they came down to Troas.
Acts. And a vision appeared to Paul during the night. A certain Macedonian man was standing, imploring him,  saying, After crossing over into Macedonia, help us.
Acts. And after he saw the vision, straightaway we sought to go forth into Macedonia, concluding that the Lord called us to preach the good news to them.
Acts. Therefore, having launched from Troas, we took a straight course to Samothrace,  the next day to Neapolis,
Acts. and from there to Philippi, which is a principle city of the district of Macedonia colony. And we were in the same city remaining some days.
Acts. And on the sabbath day we went outside the city beside a river, where it was customary for prayer to be. And having sat down, we spoke to the women who came together.
Acts. And a certain woman named Lydia, a seller of purple of the city of Thyatira, a woman who worshiped God, was listening, whose heart the Lord opened to heed the things being spoken by Paul.
Acts. And when she was immersed,  her household, she urged us, saying, If ye have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, after coming into my house, remain. And she constrained us.
Acts. And it came to pass, as we were going to prayer, for a certain servant girl having a spirit of divination to meet us, who brought her masters much business by soothsaying.
Acts. This woman having followed Paul and us was crying out, saying, These men are bondmen of the Most High God, who proclaim to us the way of salvation.
Acts. And she did this on many days. But Paul, after being exasperated,  having turned, he said to the spirit, I command thee in the name of Jesus Christ to come out of her. And it came out the same hour.
Acts. But when her masters saw that the hope of their business was gone, having seized Paul and Silas, they dragged them into the marketplace to the rulers.
Acts. And after bringing them to the magistrates, they said, These men, being Jews, disturb our city,
Acts. and proclaim customs that are not permitted for us to receive nor to do, being Romans.
Acts. And the multitude rose up together against them. And the magistrates, having torn off their clothes, commanded to beat them with rods.
Acts. And having laid many blows upon them, they cast them into prison, having ordered the jailor to guard them securely,
Acts. who, having received such an order, threw them into the inner prison,  fastened their feet in the stocks.
Acts. Now toward midnight Paul and Silas, while praying, were singing praises to God,  the prisoners were listening to them.
Acts. And suddenly a great earthquake occurred, so as for the foundations of the prison to shake. And immediately all the doors were opened,  the bonds of all the men were unfastened.
Acts. And the jailor, who became awake and who saw the prison doors opened, having drawn out a sword was going to kill himself, supposing the prisoners to have fled.
Acts. But Paul cried out in a great voice, saying, Do nothing harmful to thyself, for we are all here.
Acts. And having asked for lights, he rushed in,  having become trembling, he fell down before Paul and Silas.
Acts. And after bringing them outside, he said, Sirs, what must I do so that I may be saved?
Acts. And they said, Believe in the Lord Jesus,  thou will be saved, thou and thy household.
Acts. And they spoke the word of the Lord to him,  to all those in his house.
Acts. And having taken them in that hour of the night, he washed from the stripes,  was immersed, he and all those of him, immediately.
Acts. And having brought them into his house, he set out a table,  rejoiced, having believed in God with all his house.
Acts. But when it became day, the magistrates sent out the police, saying, Release those men.
Acts. And the jailor reported these words to Paul: The magistrates have sent out so that ye may be released. Now therefore after coming out, go in peace.
Acts. But Paul said to them, Having beaten us publicly, uncondemned men, being Romans, they cast us into prison,  now they thrust us out privately? Certainly not,  after coming, they shall lead us out.
Acts. And the police reported these sayings to the magistrates,  they were afraid when they heard that they were Romans.
Acts. And having come they besought them,  when they brought them out, they asked them to go out of the city.
Acts. And having departed from the prison, they came in to Lydia. And after seeing the brothers, they encouraged them,  departed.
Acts. Now after passing through Amphipolis and Apollonia, they came to Thessalonica where there was a synagogue of the Jews.
Acts. And according to Paul's custom, he went in to them,  for three sabbaths he discoursed with them from the scriptures,
Acts. explaining and pointing out that it was necessary for the Christ to suffer,  to rise from the dead, , This Jesus, whom I proclaim to you, is the Christ.
Acts. And some of them were persuaded,  joined with Paul and Silas,  of the devout Greeks a great quantity,  of the prominent women not a few.
Acts. But the disobedient Jews having taken along certain evil men of the marketplaces,  having gathered a mob, were rioting the city. And having stood by the house of Jason, they sought to bring them out to the populace.
Acts. And not having found them, they dragged Jason and some brothers to the city rulers, shouting, The men who have agitated the world, these are present here also,
Acts. whom Jason has received. And all these men are acting against the decrees of Caesar, asserting another man to be king, Jesus.
Acts. And they disturbed the multitude and the city rulers when they heard these things.
Acts. And after taking bond from Jason and the other men, they released them.
Acts. And the brothers straightaway sent both Paul and Silas away through the night to Berea, who, when they arrived, went into the synagogue of the Jews.
Acts. But these were more noble than those in Thessalonica, who received the word with all willingness, examining the scriptures daily, if it has these things this way.
Acts. Indeed therefore many of them believed, also of the prominent Greek women,  of men, not a few.
Acts. But when the Jews of Thessalonica also learned that the word of God was proclaimed by Paul at Berea, they came there also, agitating the crowds.
Acts. But then straightaway the brothers sent Paul away to go as far as to the sea,  both Silas and Timothy remained there.
Acts. And those who brought Paul led him as far as Athens. And after taking a command for Silas and Timothy, that they should come to him quickly, they departed.
Acts. But while Paul waited for them in Athens, his spirit was aroused within him, seeing the city being completely idolatrous.
Acts. Indeed therefore he was discoursing in the synagogue with the Jews,  with those who worship,  in the marketplace every day with those who happened by.
Acts. And also some of the Epicurean and Stoic philosophers encountered him. And some said, Whatever does this babbler want to say? But others, He seems to be a proclaimer of strange deities, because he brought the good news-Jesus and the resurrection.
Acts. And having taken him, they brought him to the Areopagus, saying, Can we understand what this new doctrine is, being spoken by thee?
Acts. For thou bring some surprising things to our ears. Therefore, we want to know whatever these things aim to be.
Acts. Now all the Athenians,  the foreigners who dwell alien there, were at leisure in nothing else, than to tell or to hear something new.
Acts. And having stood in the middle of the Areopagus, Paul said, Athenian men, I perceive you as deity-fearing in all things.
Acts. For, passing through and examining your religious objects, I also found an altar on which had been engraved, TO AN UNKNOWN GOD. Whom therefore ye worship unknowingly, him I proclaim to you.
Acts. The God who made the world and all things in it, he, being Lord of heaven and earth, dwells not in temples made with hands,
Acts. nor is he served by the hands of men, as needing anything, since he himself gives to all life,  breath, with all things.
Acts. And he made from one blood every nation of men to dwell upon all the face of the earth, having determined prescribed times,  the limits of their occupancy,
Acts. to search for the Lord, if indeed perhaps they might grope for him and find him, although being not far from each one of us.
Acts. For in him we live,  move,  exist, as also some of the performers from you have said, For of him we are also offspring.
Acts. Being therefore offspring of God, we ought not think the Divine to be like gold, or silver, or stone handiwork of the skill and thought of man.
Acts. Indeed therefore having overlooked the times of ignorance, God now commands for all men everywhere to repent.
Acts. Because he appointed a day during which he is going to judge the world in righteousness by a man whom he appointed, having provided assurance to all men because he raised him from the dead.
Acts. But when they heard the resurrection of the dead, of course they mocked,  others said, We will hear thee again about this.
Acts. And so Paul departed from among them.
Acts. But some men, having joined with him, believed, among whom was also Dionysius the Areopagite,  a woman named Damaris,  others with them.
Acts. And after these things Paul having separated from Athens, he came to Corinth.
Acts. And having found a certain Jew named Aquila, a man of Pontus by origin, who recently came from Italy,  his wife Priscilla, because Claudius arranged for all the Jews to separate from Rome, he came to them.
Acts. And because he was of the same craft, he abode with them,  was working, for they were of the tentmakers craft.
Acts. And he was discoursing in the synagogue every sabbath,  was persuading Jews and Greeks.
Acts. And when both Silas and Timothy came down from Macedonia, Paul was being held by the Spirit, fully testifying to the Jews, Jesus the Christ.
Acts. But when they opposed and slandered him, having shaken out his clothes, he said to them, Your blood is upon your heads. I am clean. From henceforth I will go to the Gentiles.
Acts. And having departed from there, he went into the house of a certain man named Justus, who worships God, whose house was adjoining the synagogue.
Acts. And Crispus, the synagogue ruler, believed in the Lord with his whole household,  many of the Corinthians who heard believed,  were immersed.
Acts. And the Lord spoke to Paul by a vision at night, Fear not,  speak,  be not silent,
Acts. because I am with thee,  no man will lay upon thee to harm thee, because many people are for me in this city.
Acts. And he remained a year and six months, teaching the word of God among them.
Acts. But Gallio being proconsul of Achaia, the Jews with one accord attacked Paul and brought him to the judgment seat,
Acts. saying, This man is persuading men to worship God against the law.
Acts. But when Paul was going to open his mouth, Gallio said to the Jews, If therefore indeed it were some crime or evil reckless deed, O ye Jews, I would have tolerated you according to the matter.
Acts. But if it is an issue about a word and names and the law from you, look ye yourselves, for I do not intend to be a judge of these things.
Acts. And he drove them from the judgment seat.
Acts. But all the Greeks, having taken Sosthenes the synagogue ruler, were beating him in front of the judgment seat. And Gallio was not going to judge, even of these things.
Acts. But Paul, who still remained considerable days with the brothers, having separated, sailed away to Syria (and with him Priscilla and Aquila), having shaved his head in Cenchrea, for he had a vow.
Acts. And he came to Ephesus and left behind those there,  having entered into the synagogue himself, he discoursed with the Jews.
Acts. And when they asked him to remain on more time with them, he did not consent,
Acts. but separated from them, having said, I must definitely keep the coming feast at Jerusalem,  I will return again to you, God willing. And he launched from Ephesus.
Acts. And after coming down to Caesarea, having gone up and greeted the church, he went down to Antioch.
Acts. And after spending some time, he departed, passing through the region of Galatia and Phrygia, successively, strengthening all the disciples.
Acts. Now a certain Jew named Apollos, an Alexandrian by origin, an eloquent man, came to Ephesus, being mighty in the scriptures.
Acts. This was a man who was instructed in the way of the Lord. And being fervent in the Spirit, he was speaking and teaching accurately the things about the Lord, knowing only the immersion of John.
Acts. And this man began to speak boldly in the synagogue,  when Aquila and Priscilla heard him, they took him aside,  expounded to him the way of God more accurately.
Acts. And when he intended to pass through into Achaia, the brothers wrote, having encouraged the disciples to receive him, who, when he arrived, assisted much those who believed through the grace.
Acts. For he forcibly refuted the Jews in public, demonstrating by the scriptures Jesus to be the Christ.
Acts. And it came to pass while Apollos was at Corinth, for Paul, having passed through the upper regions, to come to Ephesus. And having found some disciples,
Acts. he said to them, Did ye receive the Holy Spirit when ye believed? And they said to him, But we have not even heard if there is a Holy Spirit.
Acts. And he said to them, Into what then were ye immersed? And they said, Into John's immersion.
Acts. And Paul said, John indeed immersed an immersion of repentance, saying to the people that they should believe in him who was coming after him, that is, in Jesus, the Christ.
Acts. And when they heard this, they were immersed in the name of the Lord Jesus.
Acts. And Paul having laid hands on them, the Holy Spirit came on them,  they spoke in tongues,  prophesied.
Acts. And all the men were about twelve.
Acts. And after entering into the synagogue, he spoke boldly for three months, discoursing and persuading the things about the kingdom of God.
Acts. But when some were hardened and disobedient, speaking evil of the Way before the multitude, having withdrawn from them, he separated the disciples, discoursing daily in the school of a certain Tyrannus.
Acts. And this happened for two years, so as for all those dwelling in Asia to hear the word of the Lord Jesus, both Jews and Greeks.
Acts. And God was doing extraordinary miracles by the hands of Paul,
Acts. so as to even bring handkerchiefs or aprons from his skin to those who were incapacitated and to free their infirmities from them,  the evil spirits to go out from them.
Acts. But some of the wandering Jewish exorcists, attempted to name the name of the Lord Jesus over those who had the evil spirits, saying, We adjure you by Jesus whom Paul proclaims.
Acts. And there were some sons of Sceva, a Jewish chief priest, seven doing this.
Acts. And having answered, the evil spirit said, I know Jesus and I recognize Paul,  who are ye?
Acts. And the man in whom was the evil spirit, leaping on them,  having overpowered them, he prevailed against them, so as for them to flee out of that house naked and wounded.
Acts. And this became known to all, both Jews and Greeks, to those who dwell at Ephesus. And fear fell upon them all,  the name of the Lord Jesus was magnified.
Acts. And many of those who have believed came, confessing,  reporting their practices.
Acts. And a considerable number of those who practiced magical things, having brought their books together, burned them in the sight of all. And they counted the price of them,  found it fifty thousand pieces of silver.
Acts. Thus the word of the Lord was growing mightily and was prevailing.
Acts. Now when these things were fulfilled, Paul decided in the spirit, after passing through Macedonia and Achaia, to go to Jerusalem, having said, After becoming there, I must also see Rome.
Acts. And having sent into Macedonia two of those who help him, Timothy and Erastus, he himself stayed in Asia for a while.
Acts. And about that time there developed no small stir about the Way.
Acts. For a certain silversmith named Demetrius who makes silver shrines of Artemis, brought no little work to the craftsmen,
Acts. to whom also (having assembled the workmen about such things) he said, Men, ye know that our prosperity is from this work.
Acts. And ye see and hear, that not only at Ephesus,  almost in all Asia, this man Paul, having persuaded them, turned away a considerable multitude, saying that there are no gods made by hands.
Acts. And not only is this our part liable to come into disrepute,  also the temple of the great goddess Artemis is going to be regarded for nothing,  also her magnificence be destroyed, whom all Asia and the world worship.
Acts. And when they heard this, having become full of wrath, they cried out, saying, The great Artemis of Ephesians.
Acts. And the whole city was filled with the confusion. And they rushed with one accord into the theatre, having seized Gaius and Aristarchus, Macedonians, traveling companions of Paul.
Acts. And when Paul wanted to enter in to the crowd, the disciples did not let him.
Acts. And also some of the Asian officers, being their friends, having sent to him, implored him not to give himself into the theatre.
Acts. Indeed therefore some cried out one thing, some another, for the assembly was confused,  most had not seen why they had come together.
Acts. And they urged forward Alexander out of the multitude, having put him forward from the Jews. And Alexander having waved his hand, wanted to make a defense to the crowd.
Acts. But after recognizing that he was a Jew, one voice developed from them all, crying out for about two hours, The great Artemis of Ephesians.
Acts. And when the town clerk calmed the multitude, he says, Ephesian men, now who is the man who does not know the city of the Ephesians being temple-guardian of the great goddess Artemis,  of what fell from Zeus?
Acts. Therefore these things being undeniable, ye ought to be restrained,  do nothing rash.
Acts. For ye brought these men, who are neither sacrilegious nor blaspheming your goddess.
Acts. Indeed therefore if Demetrius,  the craftsmen with him, have a matter against any man, forums are brought,  there are proconsuls. Let them accuse each other.
Acts. And if ye seek anything about other things, it will be decided in the assembly within law.
Acts. For we are also in danger to be accused about the uproar today, there being no cause about which we can give account of this commotion.
Acts. And having said these things, he dismissed the assembly.
Acts. And after the uproar ceased, Paul having summoned the disciples and having embraced them, he departed to go into Macedonia.
Acts. And having passed through those parts,  having exhorted them with many words, he came into Greece.
Acts. And having spent three months there,  a conspiracy having developed against him by Jews, intending to go up into Syria, a decision developed to return through Macedonia.
Acts. And there accompanied him as far as Asia, Sopater a Berean,  of the Thessalonians, Aristarchus and Secundus,  Gaius a Derbean,  Timothy,  the Asians, Tychicus and Trophimus.
Acts. These men, who went ahead, awaited us at Troas.
Acts. And we sailed away from Philippi after the days of unleavened bread,  came to them at Troas within five days, where we stayed seven days.
Acts. And upon the first day of the week, the disciples having come together to break bread, Paul discoursed with them, intending to depart on the morrow. And he prolonged his speech until midnight.
Acts. And there were considerable lights in the upper floor where we were gathered together.
Acts. And a certain young man named Eutychus sitting in the window, being carried away by deep sleep (Paul discoursing on more), being carried away by sleep, he fell down below from the third floor,  was taken up dead.
Acts. But Paul having come down, he fell on him,  having embraced him he said, Be not troubled, for his life is in him.
Acts. And after getting up,  having broken bread and eaten,  having conversed for a considerable time, until dawn, thus he departed.
Acts. And they brought the boy alive,  were not a little comforted.
Acts. But we, having gone ahead to the ship, went up to Assos, intending from there to take up Paul, for so it was arranged, he himself intending to go on foot.
Acts. And when he met with us at Assos, having taken him up, we came to Mitylene.
Acts. And having sailed from there on the next day, we arrived opposite Chios,  the next day we came near to Samos. And having remained in Trogyllium, on the following day we came to Miletus.
Acts. For Paul determined to sail past Ephesus, so that he might not happen to lose time in Asia. For he was hastening, if it were possible, for him to become at Jerusalem the day of Pentecost.
Acts. And from Miletus having sent to Ephesus, he summoned the elders of the congregation.
Acts. And when they came to him, he said to them, Ye know, from the first day in which I stepped in Asia, how I became with you all the time,
Acts. serving the Lord with all humility,  many tears and trials that befell me by the conspiracies of the Jews.
Acts. How I kept back nothing of these things that are beneficial, not to inform you,  to teach you in public,  from house to house,
Acts. testifying both to Jews and to Greeks repentance toward God,  faith toward our Lord Jesus.
Acts. And now behold, I, bound in the spirit, am going to Jerusalem, not knowing the things that will happen to me in it,
Acts. except that the Holy Spirit testifies from city to city, saying that bonds and afflictions await me.
Acts. But I make nothing of the matter, nor do I hold my life precious to myself, so as to fully complete my course with joy,  the ministry that I received from the Lord Jesus, to solemnly testify the good news of the grace of God.
Acts. And now behold, I have seen that ye will no longer see my face, ye all among whom I passed through preaching the kingdom of God.
Acts. Therefore I solemnly declare to you this day, that I am clean from the blood of all men.
Acts. For I did not withdraw from declaring to you the whole plan of God.
Acts. Take heed therefore to yourselves,  to all the flock, among which the Holy Spirit placed you guardians, to tend the church of the Lord and God, which he purchased by his own blood.
Acts. For I know this, that after my departure grievous wolves will enter in among you, not sparing the flock.
Acts. And from you yourselves men will rise up, speaking distorted things, to draw away the disciples after them.
Acts. Therefore watch ye, remembering that for three years, night and day, I did not cease warning each one with tears.
Acts. And now brothers, I commit you to God,  to the word of his grace, which is able to build up,  to give you an inheritance among all those who have been sanctified.
Acts. I coveted no man's silver, or gold, or apparel.
Acts. Ye yourselves know that these hands served my needs,  to those who were with me.
Acts. I gave you a glimpse of all things, that so laboring ye ought to aid the weak,  to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, that he himself said, It is more blessed to give than to receive.
Acts. And having spoken these things, having knelt down, he prayed with them all.
Acts. And there developed considerable weeping of all. And having fallen on Paul's neck, they kissed him much,
Acts. sorrowing especially for the word that he had spoken, that they were going to see his face no more. And they accompanied him to the ship.
Acts. And when it came to pass to launch us, after being drawn away from them, after going a straight course, we came to Cos,  the next day to Rhodes,  from there to Patara.
Acts. And having found a ship crossing over to Phoenicia, having gotten on, we launched.
Acts. And having sighted Cyprus,  having left it behind on the left side, we sailed to Syria and came down to Tyre, for there the ship was unloading the merchandise.
Acts. And having found disciples we remained there seven days, who said to Paul through the Spirit not to go up to Jerusalem.
Acts. And when it came to pass for us to finish the days, having gone forth, we were departing, all accompanying us, with women and children, as far as outside the city. And having knelt on the beach we prayed.
Acts. And having bid farewell to each other, we went up in the ship,  those men returned to their own things.
Acts. And when we finished the voyage from Tyre, we came to Ptolemais. And having greeted the brothers, we remained with them one day.
Acts. And on the morrow, after going forth, those around Paul came to Caesarea. And having entered into the house of Philip the evangelist, being of the seven, we dwelt with him.
Acts. Now four virgin daughters who prophesied were with this man.
Acts. And as we remained more days, a certain prophet named Agabus came down from Judea.
Acts. And having come to us,  having taken Paul's belt, having bound both his feet and hands, he said, The Holy Spirit says these things: Thus the Jews in Jerusalem will bind the man whose belt this is,  will deliver him into the hands of Gentiles.
Acts. And when we heard these things, both we and those local men urged him not to go up to Jerusalem.
Acts. And Paul answered, What are ye doing, weeping and breaking my heart? For I fare ready not only to be bound,  also to die in Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus.
Acts. And since he was not persuaded, we were quiet, having said, May the will of the Lord happen.
Acts. And after these days, having made preparation, we went up to Jerusalem.
Acts. And also the disciples from Caesarea went together with us, bringing a certain Mnason, a Cypriot, an old disciple with whom we would lodge.
Acts. And when we came to Jerusalem, the brothers received us gladly.
Acts. And on the following day Paul went in with us to James,  all the elders were present.
Acts. And having greeted them, he reported one by one what God did among the Gentiles through his ministry.
Acts. And when the men heard, they glorified God, having said to him, Thou see, brother, how many thousands there are of the Jews who have believed,  they are all zealots of the law.
Acts. And they were informed about thee, that thou teach all the Jews throughout the nations desertion from Moses, telling them not to circumcise the children nor to walk by the customs.
Acts. What is it therefore? Certainly the multitude needs to get together, for they will hear that thou have come.
Acts. Therefore do this that we say to thee. Four men are with us who have a vow on themselves.
Acts. Having taken these, be purified with them. And pay expenses for them, so that they may shave the head. And all may know, that things of which they have been informed about thee, are nothing,  thou thyself also walk orderly, keeping the law.
Acts. And about the Gentiles who have believed, we sent word, having decided for them to keep no such thing, except for them to guard against what is sacrificed to idols,  from blood,  from what is strangled,  from fornication.
Acts. Then Paul, having taken the men on the following day, having been purified with them, entered into the temple, declaring the fulfillment of the days of purification, until the offering was offered for each one of them.
Acts. And when the seven days were about to be completed, the Jews from Asia, when they saw him in the temple, stirred up all the people and threw hands on him,
Acts. crying out, Men, Israelites, help. This is the man who teaches all men everywhere against the people,  the law,  this place. And besides he also brought Greeks into the temple,  has defiled this holy place.
Acts. For they were men who saw Trophimus the Ephesian in the city with him, whom they supposed that Paul brought into the temple.
Acts. And the whole city was moved,  there developed a running together of the people. And having taken Paul they dragged him out of the temple,  straightaway the doors were shut.
Acts. And while seeking to kill him, a report went up to the chief captain of the band, that all Jerusalem has been stirred up.
Acts. And immediately after taking soldiers and centurions, he ran down to them. And they, when they saw the chief captain and the soldiers, stopped beating Paul.
Acts. And the chief captain having come near, he seized him,  commanded him to be bound with two chains. And he inquired whoever he may be,  what it is he has been doing.
Acts. And some among the crowd shouted out one thing, some another. And not being able to know the certainty because of the uproar, he commanded him to be carried into the fort.
Acts. And it came to pass when on the steps (it happened for him to be carried by the soldiers because of the violence of the crowd,
Acts. for the mass of the people followed, crying out, Away with him),
Acts. and as Paul was going to be brought into the fort, he says to the chief captain, Is it permitted for me to speak to thee? And he said, Thou know Greek?
Acts. Then thou are not the Egyptian who revolted before these days,  who led out into the wilderness the four thousand men of the Assassins?
Acts. But Paul said, I am really a Jewish man of Tarsus of Cilicia, a citizen of no insignificant city. And I beg thee, allow me to speak to the people.
Acts. And having permitted him, Paul, having stood on the steps, motioned his hand to the people. And when a great hush developed, he called out in the Hebrew language, saying,
Acts. Men, brothers,  fathers, hear now my defense to you.
Acts. And having heard that he called out to them in the Hebrew language, they offered more silence. And he says,
Acts. I am indeed a Jewish man, born in Tarsus of Cilicia,  reared in this city at the feet of Gamaliel, reared accurately in the paternal law, being a zealot of God, as ye all are today.
Acts. And I persecuted this Way as far as death, binding and delivering into prisons both men and women.
Acts. As also the high priest testifies about me,  all the senior council, from whom also having received letters to the brothers in Damascus, I was going to bring bound even those who were there to Jerusalem so that they might be punished.
Acts. And there happened to me, while going and approaching Damascus about noon, suddenly to flash forth from heaven a great light around me.
Acts. And I fell to the ground,  heard a voice saying to me, Saul, Saul, why do thou persecute me?
Acts. And I answered, Who are thou, Lord? And he said to me, I am Jesus the Nazarene, whom thou persecute.
Acts. And those who were with me indeed saw the light and became afraid,  they heard not the voice of him who spoke to me.
Acts. And I said, What shall I do, Lord? And the Lord said to me, After rising, go into Damascus,  there it will be told thee about all things that have been assigned for thee to do.
Acts. And as I was not seeing from the splendor of that light, I came into Damascus, being led by hand by those who accompanied me.
Acts. And a certain Ananias, a devout man according to the law, having a good report by all the Jews who dwell there,
Acts. having come near me,  having stood by, he said to me, Brother Saul, look up. And I looked up on him the same hour.
Acts. And he said, The God of our fathers appointed thee to know his will,  to see the Righteous Man,  to hear a voice from his mouth,
Acts. because thou will be a witness for him to all men of the things that thou have seen and heard.
Acts. And now what is it going to be? Having arisen, immerse and wash away thy sins, calling on the name of the Lord.
Acts. And it came to pass, my having returned to Jerusalem and while I prayed in the temple, for me to became in a trance.
Acts. And I saw him saying to me, Hurry and depart in haste out of Jerusalem, because they will not accept thy testimony about me.
Acts. And I said, Lord, they know that I was imprisoning and beating in every synagogue those who believe in thee.
Acts. And when the blood of Stephen thy witness was shed, I myself also was standing by,  approving his killing,  keeping the garments of those who killed him.
Acts. And he said to me, Depart, because I will send thee far away to Gentiles.
Acts. And they heard him until this word. And they lifted up their voice, saying, Away with such a man from the earth, for he is not fit to live.
Acts. And of them crying out,  throwing off their garments,  casting dust into the air,
Acts. the chief captain commanded him be brought into the fort, having said to examine him by scourging, so that he might know for what reason they shouted against him this way.
Acts. And as they stretched him out with the thongs, Paul said to the centurion who stood by, Is it permitted for you to scourge a Roman man,  uncondemned?
Acts. And when the centurion heard, having come to the chief captain, he reported, saying, Look! What are thou about to do? For this man is a Roman.
Acts. And the chief captain having come, he said to him, Tell me if thou are a Roman. And he said, Yes.
Acts. And the chief captain answered, Of a great sum I obtained this citizenship. And Paul said, But then I was born so.
Acts. Straightaway therefore those who were about to examine him withdrew from him. And the chief captain was also afraid when he learned that he was a Roman,  because he was who bound him.
Acts. But on the morrow, wanting to know the certainty of why he was accused by the Jews, he loosed him from the bonds,  commanded the chief priests and all their council to come. And having brought Paul down, he set him before them.
Acts. And Paul, after looking intently at the council, said, Men, brothers, I have been a citizen in all good conscience to God until this day.
Acts. And the high priest Ananias ordered those who stood by him to strike his mouth.
Acts. Then Paul said to him, God is going to smite thee, a whitewashed wall. Thou even sit judging me according to the law,  violating law, thou command me to be struck?
Acts. And those who stood by said, Thou revile God's high priest?
Acts. And Paul said, I had not known, brothers, that he is a high priest, for it is written, Thou shall not speak ill of a ruler of thy people.
Acts. But when Paul ascertained that the one part were Sadducees and the other Pharisees, he cried out in the council, Men, brothers, I am a Pharisee, son of a Pharisee. About the hope and resurrection of the dead I am judged.
Acts. And when he said this, there developed a conflict of the Pharisees and Sadducees,  the group was divided.
Acts. For in fact Sadducees say to be no resurrection nor agent nor spirit,  Pharisees acknowledge them all.
Acts. And there developed a great clamor. And some of the scholars of the Pharisees part having risen, they argued vehemently, saying, We find nothing wrong in this man. But if a spirit spoke to him, or an agent, we should not fight against God.
Acts. And a great conflict having developed, the chief captain, having been alarmed lest Paul might be torn apart by them, commanded the soldiers to go down and take him away from the midst of them,  bring him into the fort.
Acts. And the following night the Lord, having stood by him, said, Cheer up, Paul, for as thou have testified these things about me at Jerusalem, so thou must testify also at Rome.
Acts. And when it became day, some of the Jews, having made a conspiracy, put themselves under a curse, saying neither to eat nor to drink until they would kill Paul.
Acts. And there were more than forty who made this conspiracy,
Acts. who, having come near to the chief priests and the elders, said, We have put ourselves under a curse, a curse to taste of nothing until we would kill Paul.
Acts. Now therefore ye with the council report to the chief captain that tomorrow he may bring him down to you, as though going to inquire more accurately the things about him. And we, before he comes near, are prepared to kill him.
Acts. But the son of Paul's sister, having heard of the ambush, having come and entered into the fort, he informed Paul.
Acts. And Paul, having called one of the centurions, said, Take this young man to the chief captain, for he has something to inform him.
Acts. Indeed therefore having taken him, he brought him to the chief captain,  says, Paul the prisoner, having called me, asked me to bring this young man to thee, who has something to say to thee.
Acts. And the chief captain having grasped his hand,  having gone in private, he asked him, What is it that thou have to inform me?
Acts. And he said, The Jews have agreed to ask thee that tomorrow thou would bring Paul down to the council, as though going to inquire something more accurately about him.
Acts. Therefore thou should not be persuaded by them, for more than forty men of them wait to ambush him, who have put themselves under an oath, neither to eat nor drink until they have killed him. And now they are ready, expecting the promise from thee.
Acts. Indeed therefore the chief captain dismissed the young man, having ordered, Tell no man that thou have shown these things to me.
Acts. And having summoned a certain two of the centurions, he said, Prepare two hundred soldiers that they may go to Caesarea,  seventy horsemen,  two hundred spearmen at the third hour of the night.
Acts. And provide beasts, so that after mounting Paul, they may bring him safely to Felix the governor,
Acts. after writing a letter containing this form:
Acts. Claudius Lysias to the eminent governor Felix, greeting.
Acts. This man who was seized by the Jews,  was going to be killed by them, having stood by with the soldiers, I rescued him, having learned that he is a Roman.
Acts. And wanting to know for what reason they accused him, I brought him down to their council,
Acts. whom I found accusing about issues of their law, having not one accusation worthy of death or of bonds.
Acts. And when it was reported to me of a plot going to be against the man by the Jews, I immediately sent him to thee, also having commanded the accusers to speak before thee the things against him. Be strong.
Acts. Indeed therefore, the soldiers, according to that which was precisely arranged for them, having taken Paul, they brought him through the night to Antipatris.
Acts. But on the morrow they returned to the fort, having allowed the horsemen to depart with him,
Acts. who, after coming to Caesarea and having delivered the letter to the governor, also presented Paul to him.
Acts. And the governor having read it,  having questioned from what province he was,  having found out that he was from Cilicia,
Acts. he said, I will hear thee when thine accusers also will arrive. And he commanded him to be kept in the Praetorium of Herod.
Acts. And after five days Ananias the high priest came down with the elders,  a certain orator, Tertullus, who appeared to the governor against Paul.
Acts. And when he was called, Tertullus began to accuse him, saying, Experiencing much peace because of thee,  worthy deeds happening to this nation because of thy foresight,
Acts. we welcome, both always and everywhere, eminent Felix, with all thankfulness.
Acts. But, that I may not detain thee on more, I entreat thee in thy clemency to hear us briefly.
Acts. For we have found this man a plague, who even instigates sedition among all the Jews throughout the world,  a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes,
Acts. who also attempted to profane the temple, whom also we took,
Acts. [This verse is not in the majority of the Greek manuscripts.]
Acts. from whom thou will be able, having examined him, to learn about all these things of which we accuse him.
Acts. And the Jews also agreed, claiming to have these things this way.
Acts. And when the governor gestured to him to speak, Paul answered, Knowing for many years thou being a judge to this nation, I gladly make a defense of these things about myself,
Acts. thou being able to learn that there are for me not more than twelve days from which I went up to worship in Jerusalem.
Acts. And they found me neither in the temple disputing against any man, nor making a gang of a group, nor in the synagogues, nor in the city.
Acts. Neither can they prove against me of which things they now accuse me.
Acts. But this I confess to thee, that according to the Way that they call a sect, so serve I the paternal God, believing all things written according to the law and the prophets,
Acts. having hope toward God, which they themselves also await, to come to be a resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust.
Acts. And in this I fashion myself, having a conscience always non-stumbling before God and men.
Acts. Now after more years I came, going to make donations to my nation,  offerings,
Acts. during which certain Jews from Asia found me purified in the temple, not with a crowd or with a tumult,
Acts. who ought to be here before thee,  to accuse, if they would have anything against me.
Acts. Or let these men themselves say what wrongdoing they found in me, having stood before the council,
Acts. or about this one voice that I cried out standing among them: About a resurrection of the dead I am judged by you this day.
Acts. Now Felix, having heard these things, having known more precisely the things about the Way, he deferred them, having said, When Lysias the chief captain comes down, I will determine the things toward you.
Acts. He also arranged for the centurion to guard Paul,  to have reduced confinement,  to forbid none of his own men to serve or to come to him.
Acts. And after some days, Felix having arrived with Drusilla, his wife being Jewish, he summoned Paul,  heard him about the faith in Christ.
Acts. And as he discoursed about righteousness,  self-control,  the judgment going to be, Felix, having become afraid, answered, Go now,  having a convenient time, I will summon thee.
Acts. He also hoped simultaneously that money would be given him by Paul so that he might free him. And so, summoning him more frequently, he conversed with him.
Acts. But two years having been fulfilled, Felix received a successor, Porcius Festus. And wanting to lay down favors to the Jews, Felix left behind Paul bound.
Acts. Festus therefore having entered into the province, after three days he went up to Jerusalem from Caesarea.
Acts. And the high priest and the principal men of the Jews appeared to him against Paul,  urged him,
Acts. asking a favor against him, that he would summon him to Jerusalem, making an ambush to kill him on the way.
Acts. Indeed therefore Festus answered to keep Paul in Caesarea,  he himself was going to go out quickly.
Acts. Therefore he says, Let the able men among you, after coming down together, accuse him if there is anything in this man.
Acts. And after remaining among them more than ten days, having gone down to Caesarea, on the morrow having sat on the judgment seat, he commanded Paul to be brought.
Acts. And when he arrived, the Jews who came down from Jerusalem stood around, bringing many and serious accusations against Paul, which they could not prove,
Acts. while he was defending, Neither against the law of the Jews, nor against the temple, nor against Caesar, have I transgressed anything.
Acts. But Festus, wanting to lay down a favor to the Jews, having answered Paul, said, Are thou willing, after going up to Jerusalem, to be judged there about these things before me?
Acts. But Paul said, I am standing at the judgment seat of Caesar, where I ought to be judged. I did nothing wrong Jewish, as thou also very well know.
Acts. For if I am indeed wrong,  have done anything worthy of death, I do not refuse to die,  if there is nothing of what these men accuse me, no man can give me to them freely. I appeal Caesar.
Acts. Then Festus, when he conferred with the council, answered, Thou have appealed Caesar, to Caesar thou will go.
Acts. Now some days having passed, Agrippa the king and Bernice arrived at Caesarea, greeting Festus.
Acts. And as he was remaining there more days, Festus declared to the king the things concerning Paul, saying, There is a certain man who was left behind a prisoner by Felix,
Acts. about whom, when I became in Jerusalem, the chief priests and the elders of the Jews revealed, asking judgment against him.
Acts. To whom I answered, that it is not a custom by Romans to give any man freely for destruction, before the man being accused has the accusers in person,  receives an occasion of defense about the accusation.
Acts. When therefore they assembled here, not having made one delay, next in order, having sat on the judgment seat, I commanded the man to be brought.
Acts. About whom, when the accusers stood up, they brought not one cause of what I supposed,
Acts. but had certain issues against him about his own religion,  about a certain Jesus, who has died, whom Paul was claiming to be alive.
Acts. And I, being uncertain of the controversy about this man, asked whether he wants to go to Jerusalem and be judged there about these things.
Acts. But when Paul appealed to be kept for the decision of Augustus, I commanded him to be kept until I might send him to Caesar.
Acts. And Agrippa said to Festus, I also want to hear the man myself. And tomorrow, he says, thou will hear him.
Acts. Therefore on the morrow, Agrippa and Bernice having come with great pomp,  having entered into the courtroom,  with the chief captains and the men of prominence who were of the city,  Festus who commanded, Paul was brought in.
Acts. And Festus says, King Agrippa,  all who are present with us, ye see this man about whom all the multitude of the Jews appealed to me, both at Jerusalem and here, shouting he ought not to live any longer.
Acts. But I, having understood him to have done nothing worthy of death,  also him, this man, having appealed Augustus I decided to send him.
Acts. About whom I do not have anything certain to write to the lord. Therefore I brought him before you,  especially before thee, King Agrippa, so that, an examination having occurred, I may have something to write.
Acts. For it seems to me unreasonable, sending a prisoner,  not to specify the causes against him.
Acts. And Agrippa said to Paul, It is permitted thee to speak for thyself. Then Paul, having stretched forth his hand, made a defense.
Acts. Concerning all things of which I am accused by the Jews, King Agrippa, I consider myself blessed, being about to make my defense before thee today.
Acts. Especially thee, being an expert of all things regarding Jews, both habits and issues. Therefore I beg thee to hear me patiently.
Acts. Indeed therefore, my manner of life from youth, having developed from the beginning among my nation at Jerusalem, all the Jews know,
Acts. having known me previously from the beginning, if they were willing to testify, that according to the strictest party of our religion I lived a Pharisee.
Acts. And now for the hope of the promise made by God to the fathers, I stand being judged,
Acts. to which our twelve tribes, serving in earnestness night and day, hope to attain, about which hope, King Agrippa, I am accused by the Jews!
Acts. Why is it judged incredible with you, if God raises the dead?
Acts. Indeed therefore I thought it necessary for myself to do many things contrary to the name of Jesus the Nazarene,
Acts. which also I did at Jerusalem. And I locked up many of the sanctified in prisons, having received authority from the chief priests. And when they were killed, I gave a vote against them.
Acts. And punishing them often at all the synagogues, I compelled them to blaspheme. And being extraordinarily furious toward them, I persecuted them even as far as to outside cities.
Acts. And during which, while going to Damascus with the authority and commission of the chief priests,
Acts. at midday, O king, I saw on the road a light from heaven, above the brightness of the sun, which shone around me and those who went with me.
Acts. And when we all fell to the ground, I heard a voice speaking to me,  saying in the Hebrew language, Saul, Saul, why do thou persecute me? It is hard for thee to kick against the goads.
Acts. And I said, Who are thou, Lord? And he said, I am Jesus whom thou persecute.
Acts. But arise,  stand upon thy feet, for I appeared to thee for this, to appoint thee an assistant and a witness both of things that thou saw,  of the things that I will make visible to thee,
Acts. delivering thee from the people,  from the Gentiles, to whom I send thee,
Acts. to open their eyes to turn about from darkness to light and from the power of Satan to God, for them to receive remission of sins and a lot among those who have been sanctified by faith in me.
Acts. Whereupon, King Agrippa, I did not become disobedient to the heavenly vision,
Acts. but declaring first to those at Damascus and then at Jerusalem,  in all the region of Judea,  to the Gentiles, to repent and return to God, doing works worthy of repentance.
Acts. Because of these things the Jews, having seized me in the temple, tried to grasp and kill me.
Acts. Having therefore experienced the help from God, I stand to this day solemnly declaring both to small and great, saying nothing apart from what both the prophets and Moses said was going to happen,
Acts. that the suffering Christ, since first from a resurrection of the dead, is going to proclaim light to our people and to the nations.
Acts. And while he made a defense by these things, Festus said in a loud voice, Paul, thou are mad. Much scholarship is driving thee into madness.
Acts. But Paul says, I am not mad, eminent Festus,  I speak forth sayings of truth and soberness.
Acts. For the king knows about these things, before whom I also speak boldly. For I am convinced not any of these things, nothing, to be hidden from him. For this was not done in a corner.
Acts. King Agrippa, do thou believe the prophets? I know that thou believe.
Acts. And Agrippa said to Paul, By a little thou persuade me to become a Christian.
Acts. And Paul said, I ever pray to God, both by little and by much, not only thee,  also all who hear me this day, to become such kind as I also am, apart from these bonds.
Acts. And when he spoke these things, the king rose up,  the governor,  Bernice,  those who sat with them.
Acts. And having withdrawn, they spoke to each other, saying, This man does nothing worthy of death or of bonds.
Acts. And Agrippa said to Festus, This man could have been released, if he had not appealed Caesar.
Acts. And when it was determined for us to sail for Italy, they delivered both Paul and some other prisoners to a centurion named Julius, of the band of Augustus.
Acts. And having gotten on a ship of Adramyttium that was going to sail to the places along Asia, we launched, Aristarchus, a Macedonian of Thessalonica, being with us.
Acts. And on another day we put in at Sidon. And Julius, who treated Paul kindly, allowed him to undergo care, after going to his friends.
Acts. And having launched from there, we sailed under lee of Cyprus, because the winds were contrary.
Acts. And having sailed across the depths along Cilicia and Pamphylia, we came to Myra, of Lycia.
Acts. And there, the centurion having found a ship of Alexandria sailing for Italy, he put us in it.
Acts. And sailing slowly during considerable days,  with difficulty having come along the Cnidus, the wind not allowing us further, we sailed under lee of Crete, along Salmone.
Acts. And sailing by it with difficulty, we came to a certain place called Fair Havens, near to which was Lasea City.
Acts. And considerable time having past,  the voyage now being dangerous, also because the Fast was now past, Paul urged,
Acts. saying to them, Men, I perceive that the voyage is going to be with injury and much damage, not only of the cargo and the ship,  also of our lives.
Acts. But the centurion was convinced more by the captain and the shipmaster than to those things spoken by Paul.
Acts. And since the haven was inconvenient to winter in, the majority gave counsel to launch from there also, if somehow they might be able, after arriving at Phoenix, to winter in a haven of Crete, looking toward southwest and northwest.
Acts. And when a south wind blew gently, having presumed to have obtained their purpose, after taking up anchor, they sailed very near by Crete.
Acts. But not long after, there threw against it a cyclonic wind called the Euroclydon.
Acts. And the ship having been caught,  not being able to face the wind, having given up, we were driven.
Acts. And having sailed under lee of a certain island called Clauda, we were able with difficulty, to develop control of the skiff.
Acts. And having taken that up, they used helps, undergirding the ship. And fearing lest they might fall off into the sandbank, having lowered the vessel, they were driven this way.
Acts. And since we were exceedingly storm-tossed, on the next day they jettisoned.
Acts. And the third day we cast out by hands the tackling of the ship.
Acts. And when neither sun nor stars appeared for more days,  no small storm laying on, all remaining hope for us to be saved was taken away.
Acts. And being long without food, then Paul, who stood in the midst of them, said, Ye truly ought, O men, to have complied with me, not to launch from Crete,  gain this damage and loss.
Acts. And now I exhort you to cheer up, for there will not be one loss of life from you, except of the ship.
Acts. For there stood by me this night an agent of the God whose I am, whom also I serve,
Acts. saying, Fear not, Paul. Thou must stand before Caesar,  lo, God has granted thee all those sailing with thee.
Acts. Therefore men, cheer up, for I believe God, that it will be so in that way it has been told to me.
Acts. But we must fall off upon a certain island.
Acts. And when it became the fourteenth night, as we were driven about in the Adriatic sea, toward midnight the sailors suspected some region to come near them.
Acts. And having tossed lead, they found twenty fathoms,  having gone a little farther,  having tossed lead again, they found fifteen fathoms.
Acts. And fearing lest somehow we might falloff on rough places, having cast off four anchors from the stern, they prayed for day to develop.
Acts. And since the sailors sought to flee out of the ship,  having lowered the skiff into the sea in pretense as going to stretch out anchors from the bow,
Acts. Paul said to the centurion and to the soldiers, Unless these men remain in the ship, ye cannot be saved.
Acts. Then the soldiers cut away the ropes of the skiff,  let it fall off.
Acts. And until day was going to develop, Paul urged them all to partake of food, saying, Today is the fourteenth day, waiting, ye continue without food, having taken nothing.
Acts. Therefore I encourage you to take of food, for this is for your safety. For not a hair will fall from the head of one of you.
Acts. And having said these things,  having taken bread, he expressed thanks to God in the presence of all. And having broke in pieces, he began to eat.
Acts. And they all, having become encouraged, also took food.
Acts. And all the souls in the ship were two hundred seventy-six.
Acts. And after being filled of food, they unloaded the ship, throwing out the wheat into the sea.
Acts. And when it became day, they did not recognize the land,  they noticed a certain bay having a beach, onto which, they decided if possible, to drive the ship.
Acts. And having cast off the anchors, they left them in the sea, at the same time unfastening the bands of the rudders. And having hoisted up the foresail to the wind, they held firm for the shore.
Acts. And having chanced upon a place where two seas meet, they ran the ship aground. And of course, the bow having become stuck, it remained immovable,  the stern was coming apart by the force of the waves.
Acts. And a decision of the soldiers developed that they should kill the prisoners, lest any man, having swam away, might escape.
Acts. But the centurion, wanting to save Paul, prevented them from their purpose,  commanded those who were able to swim, having first jumped out, to go to the land,
Acts. and the remaining, some on boards,  some on any of the things from the ship. And so it came to pass for all to be saved to the land.
Acts. And after being saved, then they learned that the island was called Malta.
Acts. And the foreigners presented uncommon kindness to us, for, having kindled a fire, they received us all because of the present rain,  because of the cold.
Acts. And Paul having gathered a quantity of sticks,  having placed them on the fire, a viper having come out from the heat, it fastened on his hand.
Acts. And when the foreigners saw the creature hanging from his hand, they said to each other, Certainly this man is a murderer, whom, though saved from the sea, Justice did not allow to live.
Acts. Indeed therefore having shaken off the creature into the fire, he experienced nothing harmful.
Acts. But they expected he was going to swell up, or suddenly fall down dead,  when they were long expecting,  seeing nothing amiss happening to him, thinking differently, they declared him to be a god.
Acts. Now among the things around that place were fields of the chief of the island, named Publius, who, having received us kindly, lodged us three days.
Acts. And it came about for the father of Publius to be laid down, gripped by fever and dysentery, to whom Paul, having entered in,  having prayed, having laid his hands on him, healed him.
Acts. Therefore when this happened, the others also who had infirmities on the island came and were healed,
Acts. who also honored us with many honorariums. And while putting out to sea, they furnished the things for our necessities.
Acts. And after three months we set out in a ship that wintered at the island, an Alexandrian with The Twin Brothers emblem.
Acts. And after being brought down to Syracuse, we remained there three days,
Acts. from where having made a circuit, we arrived at Rhegium. And after one day, wind from the south having developed, we came a second day to Puteoli,
Acts. where, having found brothers, we were invited to stay with them seven days. And so we went toward Rome.
Acts. And from there the brothers, who heard these things about us, came for a meeting with us as far as Appius Forum and The Three Taverns, whom, when Paul saw, having expressed thanks to God, he took courage.
Acts. And when we came to Rome, the centurion delivered the prisoners to the commandant,  Paul was allowed to dwell by himself with the soldier who guarded him.
Acts. And it came to pass after three days, for Paul to call together those who were the principle men of the Jews. And when they came together, he said to them, Men, brothers, I, having done nothing against the people, or the paternal customs, I was delivered a prisoner from Jerusalem into the hands of the Romans,
Acts. who, after examining me, wanted to release me, because there was not one cause of death in me.
Acts. But when the Jews spoke against it, I was compelled to appeal Caesar, not as having anything to accuse my nation.
Acts. Because of this reason therefore I summoned you to see and to speak with me, for because of the hope of Israel I am bound with this chain.
Acts. And they said to him, We neither received letters from Judea about thee, nor did any of the brothers who came report or speak anything bad about thee.
Acts. But we think it worthy to hear from thee what thou think. For indeed about this sect, it is known to us that everywhere it is spoken against.
Acts. And having appointed a day for him, more came to him into his lodging, to whom he expounded, solemnly testifying the kingdom of God,  persuading them of the things about Jesus, both from the law of Moses and the prophets, from morning until evening.
Acts. And some were convinced by the things that were spoken,  some disbelieved.
Acts. And being discord among each other, they departed after Paul spoke one thing, saying, Well spoke the Holy Spirit through Isaiah the prophet to our fathers,
Acts. saying, Go thou to this people,  say, Hearing ye will hear,  will, no, not understand,  seeing ye will see,  will, no, not perceive.
Acts. For this people's heart was made fat,  they hear heavily with the ears. And they shut their eyes, lest they may perceive with the eyes,  hear with the ears,  understand with the heart,  should turn,  I would heal them.
Acts. Be it known to you therefore, that the salvation of God was sent to the Gentiles,  they will hear.
Acts. And when he said these things, the Jews departed, having much disputing among themselves.
Acts. And Paul dwelt two whole years in his own hired lodging. And he received all who came in to him,
Acts. preaching the kingdom of God,  teaching the things about the Lord Jesus Christ with all boldness, without hindrance.
Romans
Paul, a bondman of Jesus Christ, a called apostle having been separated for the good news of God
which he fore-promised through his prophets in the holy scriptures)
concerning his Son who was made from the seed of David according to flesh.
He who was designated Son of God in power, according to a spirit of holiness, from a resurrection of the dead-Jesus Christ our Lord-
through whom we received grace and apostleship for obedience of faith among all the nations on behalf of his name,
among which ye also are the called of Jesus Christ.
To all who are in Rome, beloved of God, to the called, to the sanctified: Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
First, I indeed express thanks to my God through Jesus Christ for all of you, that your faith is proclaimed in the whole world.
For God is my witness whom I serve in my spirit in the good news of his Son, how unceasingly I make mention of you always in my prayers,
pleading, if somehow now at last I will have a prosperous journey by the will of God to come to you.
For I long to see you, so that I may impart some spiritual gift to you, in order to establish you,
that is, to be mutually encouraged among you through each other's faith, both yours and mine.
But I do not want you to be ignorant, brothers, that I often intended to come to you (and was prevented until now), so that I might have some fruit also among you, even as among the other Gentiles.
I am debtor both to Greeks and to Barbarians, both to the wise and to the foolish.
So the willingness is in me to preach the good news also to you in Rome.
For I am not ashamed of the good news of Christ, for it is the power of God for salvation to every man who believes, both to the Jew first,  to the Greek.
For the righteousness of God is revealed in it from faith for faith, just as it is written, And the righteous man will live from faith.
For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all irreverence and unrighteousness of men, who suppress the truth in unrighteousness,
because what is knowable of God is apparent in them, for God made it known to them.
For the invisible things of him from the creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by the things made, both his eternal power and divinity, for them to be without excuse.
Because, although knowing God, they did not glorify him as God, nor were they thankful,  became vain in their reasonings and their heart was darkened without understanding.
Professing to be wise, they became foolish,
changed the glory of the incorruptible God into an image like corruptible man,  of birds,  four-footed things,  creeping things.
for this reason God gave them up in the lusts of their hearts to uncleanness, to degrade their bodies among themselves,
who changed the truth of God into the lie,  worshiped and served the creation against him who created it, who is blessed into the ages. Truly.
Because of this God gave them up to shameful passions, for even their females changed the natural use into what is against nature.
likewise also the males, having left the natural use of the female, burned in their lust toward each other, males with males producing shamelessness,  receiving in themselves the recompense of their deviancy that was fitting.
just as they did not approve having God in knowledge, God gave them over to an unfit mind, to do things that are not fit;
having been filled with all unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, greed, evil; full of envy, murder, strife, deceit, malignity;
being gossips, slanderous, God-hating, aggressors, arrogant boasters, contrivers of evil things, disobedient to parents;
without understanding, untrustworthy, without natural affection, implacable, unmerciful.
Who, knowing the righteousness of God, that those who commit such things are worthy of death, not only do them,  also favor those who do.
Therefore, O man, thou are without excuse, every man who judges, for in what thou judge the other man, thou condemn thyself, for the man who judges is doing the same things.
we know that the judgment of God is in accordance with truth against those who commit such things.
think thou this, O man who judge those who do such things and do the same, that thou will escape the judgment of God?
Or do thou despise the wealth of his goodness and forbearance and longsuffering, not knowing that the goodness of God guides thee to repentance?
But according to thy hardness,  thy impenitent heart, thou store up wrath to thyself in the day of wrath,  revelation,  righteous judgment of God,
who will render to each man according to his works,
to those who indeed seek by perseverance of good work, glory and esteem and immortality-eternal life-
but to those of self-interest,  who indeed disobey the truth but have confidence in unrighteousness-anger and wrath,
pressure and restriction, upon every soul of man who produces evil, both of the Jew first,  of the Greek,
but glory and esteem and peace to every man who works good, both to the Jew first,  to the Greek.
For there is no partiality with God.
For as many as have sinned without law will also be destroyed without law,  as many as have sinned in law will be judged by law.
For the hearers of the law are not righteous with God,  the doers of the law will be made righteous.
For when the Gentiles who have no law do by nature the things of the law, these men, not having law, are a law to themselves.
Who show the work of the law written in their hearts, testifying of their conscience,  their thoughts amidst each other accusing or also defending them
in a day when God judges the secrets of men by Jesus Christ, according to my good news.
Behold, thou are called a Jew,  rely upon the law,  boast in God,
know his will,  approve the things that are significant, being instructed out of the law.
thou have confidence in thyself to be a guide of the blind, a light of those in darkness,
a corrector of the foolish, a teacher of the childlike, having in the law the essence of knowledge and truth,
thou therefore who teach another, do thou not teach thyself? Thou who preach not to steal, do thou steal?
Thou who say not to commit adultery, do thou commit adultery? Thou who abhor idols, do thou rob temples?
Thou who boast in law, dishonor God by thy transgression of the law.
For the name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles because of you, just as it is written.
For circumcision is indeed beneficial if thou perform law,  if thou are a transgressor of law, thy circumcision has become uncircumcision.
If therefore a man of uncircumcision keeps the ordinances of the law, will not his uncircumcision be considered circumcision?
the man of natural uncircumcision who fulfills the law, will judge thee, a transgressor of law through a document and circumcision.
For he is not a Jew in what is visible, nor is circumcision in what is visible, in flesh,
but he is a Jew in what is hidden,  circumcision is of the heart, in spirit not a document, whose praise is not from men but from God.
What then is the advantage of the Jew? Or what is the benefit of circumcision?
Much every way. First, because they were indeed entrusted with the oracles of God.
For what if some did not believe? Will their unbelief make the assurance of God ineffective?
May it not happen! But let it come to pass God is true,  every man a liar, as it is written, That thou may ever be justified in thy words,  may prevail when thou are criticized.
But if our unrighteousness commends the righteousness of God, what will we say? Is God unrighteous inflicting wrath? (I speak according to a man.)
May it not happen! Otherwise how will God judge the world?
For if by my lie, the truth of God abounded to his glory, why am I also still judged as sinful,
not (as we are slandered,  as some affirm us to say) that we may do evil so that good things may come (whose condemnation is just)?
What then? Are we better? Not at all. For we already charged both Jews and Greeks to all be under sin,
as it is written, There is no righteous man, not even one.
There is no man who understands. There is no man who seeks God.
All turned away. Together they became useless. There is not a man who does goodness; there is not as much as one.
Their throat is an open grave. With their tongues they deceive. The poison of asps is under their lips,
whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness.
Their feet are swift to shed blood.
Destruction and misery are in their ways,
the way of peace they have not known.
There is no fear of God before their eyes.
Now we know that as many things as the law says, it says to those in the law, so that every mouth may be stopped,  all the world may become accountable to God.
Because from works of law no flesh will be made right before him, for through law is knowledge of sin.
But now a righteousness of God has been manifested independent of law, being witnessed by the law and the prophets.
the righteousness of God through faith in Jesus Christ is for all and upon all those who believe, for there is no distinction.
For all have sinned and come short of the glory of God,
being made righteous freely by his grace, through the redemption in Christ Jesus,
whom God set forth an expiatory sacrifice through faith in his blood, for proof of his justice, because of the passing over of the sins that have formerly occurred
in the forbearance of God), for proof of his justice at the present time, for him to be righteous,  who makes the man from Jesus' faith righteous.
Where then is the boasting? It is excluded. By what law, of works? No,  by a law of faith.
We therefore consider a man to be made righteous by faith independent of works of law.
Or is God of Jews only and not also of Gentiles? Yes, of Gentiles also,
since God is one, who will make the man of circumcision righteous from faith,  the man of uncircumcision through faith.
Do we then make law void through faith? May it not happen! Instead, we establish law.
What then will we say Abraham, our father according to flesh, to have found?
For if Abraham was made righteous from works, he has a boast,  not before God.
For what does the scripture say? And Abraham believed God,  it was reckoned to him for righteousness.
Now to the man being employed, the wage is not reckoned according to grace,  according to obligation.
But to the man not being employed,  who believes in him who makes the impious man righteous, his faith is reckoned for righteousness.
Just as David also tells the blessedness of the man to whom God imputes righteousness independent of works,
saying, Blessed are those whose iniquities are forgiven,  whose sins are covered.
Blessed is a man to whom the Lord does, no, not impute sin.
Is this blessedness therefore upon men of circumcision, or also upon men of uncircumcision? For we say, Faith was reckoned to Abraham for righteousness.
How then was it reckoned? When he was in circumcision, or in uncircumcision? Not in circumcision,  in uncircumcision.
he received the sign of circumcision, as a seal of the righteousness of his faith during uncircumcision, for him to be father of all those who believe during uncircumcision (for righteousness to also be imputed to them),
father of those of circumcision, to those not only of circumcision,  also to those who march in the steps of faith-of that during the uncircumcision of our father Abraham.
For the promise to Abraham or to his seed, for him to be heir of the world, was not through law,  through a righteousness of faith.
For if those from law are heirs, faith has been made void,  the promise has been made useless.
For the law works wrath. For where there is no law, neither is there transgression.
Because of this it is from faith, so that it is according to grace, in order for the promise to be sure to all the seed, not only to the seed from the law,  also to the seed from the faith of Abraham, who is father of us all
as it is written, I have made thee a father of many nations), before him whom he believed, of God who makes the dead alive,  who calls things not existing, as existing.
Who, against hope, believed in hope, in order for him to become father of many nations according to that which was spoken, So thy seed will be.
not being weak in faith he did not regard his body, which was now deadened (being about a hundred years old),  the deadness of Sarah's womb.
he did not waver in unbelief at the promise of God,  became strong in faith, giving glory to God,
being fully assured that what he promised, he was able also to perform.
therefore it was reckoned to him for righteousness.
Now it was not written because of him alone that it was imputed to him,
but also because of us to whom it is going to be imputed, to those who believe in him who raised Jesus our Lord from the dead,
who was delivered up for our offenses,  was raised up for our justification.
Therefore having been made righteous from faith, we have peace toward God through our Lord Jesus Christ,
through whom also we have access by faith for this grace in which we stand,  we take pride in hope of the glory of God.
not only so,  we also take pride in our tribulations, knowing that tribulation produces perseverance,
perseverance, character,  character, hope.
hope does not disappoint, because the love of God has been poured out in our hearts through the Holy Spirit that was given to us.
For while we were yet weak, in due time Christ died for the impious.
For scarcely for a righteous man will some man die, indeed perhaps for the good man some man would even dare to die.
But God commends his love toward us, that, while we were still sinners, Christ died for us.
Much more then, now having been made righteous by his blood, we will be saved from the wrath through him.
For if, while being enemies, we were reconciled to God through the death of his Son, much more having been reconciled we will be saved by his life.
not only so,  also taking pride in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we have now received the reconciliation.
Because of this, just as through one man sin entered into the world,  death through sin, so also death passed to all men, in that all sinned.
For until law sin was in the world,  sin is not imputed when there is no law.
Nevertheless death reigned from Adam until Moses, even over those who did not sin in the likeness of Adam's transgression, who is a type of the coming man.
But in this way also, the gift is not as the transgression. For if by the trespass of the one man the many died, much more the grace of God,  the gift in grace of the one man, Jesus Christ, abounded for the many.
the gift is not as through one man who sinned, for indeed the judgment from one man was for condemnation,  the gift from many offenses is for righteousness.
For if, by the offense of the one man, death reigned through the one man, much more those who receive the abundance of grace and of the gift of righteousness will reign in life through the one man, Jesus Christ.
So then, as through an offense of one man was for condemnation for all men, so also through a righteousness of one man was for justification of life for all men.
For as through the one man's disobedience the many were led sinful, so also through the obedience of the one man the many will be led righteous.
the law entered so that the offense might abound. But where sin abounded, grace was more abundant,
so that, as sin reigned in death, so also grace might reign, through righteousness, for eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.
What will we say then? We continue in sin so that grace may abound?
May it not happen! How will we who died to sin, still live in it?
Or are ye ignorant that as many as were immersed into Christ Jesus were immersed into his death?
We were buried therefore with him through the immersion into death, so that as Christ was raised up from the dead through the glory of the Father, so also we may walk in newness of life.
For if we have become co-planted in the likeness of his death, then we will also be of the resurrection.
Knowing this, that our old man was crucified with him, so that the body of sin might be inactivated, no longer to enslave us to sin.
For he who has died has been made righteous away from sin.
if we died with Christ, we believe that we will also live with him,
knowing that Christ, having been raised from the dead, dies no more. Death no more has dominion over him.
For that he died, he died to sin once,  that he lives, he lives to God.
So also ye, reckon yourselves to be indeed dead to sin,  living to God in Christ Jesus our Lord.
Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body in order to obey it, in its lusts.
do not present your body-parts as instruments of unrighteousness to sin,  present yourselves to God, as living out of the dead,  your body-parts as instruments of righteousness to God,
for sin will not have dominion over you. For ye are not under law,  under grace.
What then? May we sin, because we are not under law but under grace? May it not happen!
Know ye not, that to what ye present yourselves as bondmen for obedience, ye are bondmen to what ye obey, whether of sin for death, or of obedience for righteousness?
But thanks to God, that ye were bondmen of sin,  ye obeyed from the heart a model of doctrine for which ye were delivered.
having been set free from sin, ye were made servile to righteousness
I speak man-like because of the weakness of your flesh). For as ye presented your body-parts servile to uncleanness,  to lawlessness for lawlessness, so now present your body-parts servile to righteousness for sanctification.
For when ye were bondmen of sin, ye were uninhibited by righteousness.
What fruit therefore did ye have then, of which things ye are now ashamed? For the end of those things is death.
But now having been made free from sin,  having become servile to God, ye have your fruit for sanctification,  the end, eternal life.
For the wages of sin is death,  the gift of God is eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord.
Or are ye ignorant, brothers (for I speak to men who know the law), that the law has dominion over the man for as long a time as he lives?
For the woman under authority to the living husband has been bound by law,  if the husband should die, she has been released from the law of the husband.
So then, of the living husband, she will be called an adulteress if she becomes to another man,  if the husband should die, she is free from the law, for her not to be an adulteress having become to another man.
Therefore, my brothers, ye also became dead to the law through the body of Christ in order for ye to become to another, to him who was raised from the dead, so that we would bear fruit to God.
For when we were in the flesh, the passions of the sins were working in our body-parts (through the law) in order to bear fruit to death.
But now we have been released from the law, having died to what we were held, so as for us to serve in newness of spirit,  not in oldness of a document.
What will we say then? The law is sin? May it not happen! Yet I did not know sin except through law. For likewise I would not have known lust, if the law did not say, Thou shall not covet.
But sin, having taken opportunity through the commandment, wrought in me every evil desire, for apart from law sin is dead.
I was alive once apart from law,  when the commandment came, sin revived,  I died.
I found to me, the commandment being for life, this is for death.
For sin, having taken opportunity through the commandment, deceived me,  by it killed me.
So the law is indeed holy,  the commandment is holy and righteous and good.
Has therefore what is good become death to me? May it not happen! Instead, it is sin, so that it might be revealed, sin working death in me through what is good, so that through the commandment sin might become sinful to extreme.
For we know that the law is spiritual,  I am carnal, having been sold under sin.
For I do not understand what I do, for I do not do this that I want,  what I hate, this I do.
But if I do this that I do not want, I agree with the law that it is good.
But now I no longer perform it,  the sin dwelling in me.
For I know that good does not dwell in me, that is, in my flesh, for to will is present in me,  to do the good, I find not.
For I do not do good that I want, instead, wrong that I do not want, this I do.
But if I do this that I do not want, I no longer perform it,  sin dwelling in me.
Consequently I find the law in my wanting to do good, that evil is present in me.
For I delight in the law of God according to the inner man,
but I see a different law in my body-parts, warring against the law of my mind,  taking me captive in the law of sin, which is in my body-parts.
I am a wretched man. Who will rescue me out of the body of this death?
I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord. So then, I of myself in the mind indeed serve a law of God,  in the flesh a law of sin.
Consequently nothing is condemnation now to those in Christ Jesus, who walk not according to flesh but according to Spirit.
For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus freed me from the law of sin and of death.
For the impotence of the law, in that it was weak because of the flesh, God, having sent his own Son in a form of flesh of sin,  concerning sin, condemned sin in the flesh,
so that the justice of the law might be fulfilled in us, those who walk not according to flesh,  according to Spirit.
For those who are according to flesh think about the things of the flesh,  those according to Spirit the things of the Spirit.
For the mentality of the flesh is death,  the mentality of the Spirit is life and peace.
Because the mentality of the flesh is enmity against God, for it is not submissive to the law of God, for neither is it able.
those who are in flesh cannot please God.
But ye are not in flesh but in Spirit, if indeed the Spirit of God dwells in you. But if any man does not have the Spirit of Christ, this man is not of him.
if Christ is in you, the body is indeed dead because of sin,  the spirit is life because of righteousness.
But if the Spirit of him who raised up Jesus from the dead dwells in you, he who raised up the Christ from the dead will also give life to your mortal bodies through his Spirit that dwells in you.
So then, brothers, we are debtors, not to the flesh to live according to flesh.
For if ye live according to flesh, ye are going to die,  if in spirit ye kill the deeds of the body, ye will live.
For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, these are sons of God.
For ye did not receive a spirit of bondage again for fear,  ye received a spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father.
The Spirit itself testifies with our spirit, that we are children of God.
if children, also heirs, heirs indeed of God,  joint-heirs with Christ; if indeed we suffer jointly, so that we may also be glorified jointly.
For I reckon that the sufferings of the present time are not comparable to the glory that is going to be revealed for us.
For the eager expectation of the creation is waiting for the manifestation of the sons of God.
For the creation was made subject to futility, not willingly,  because of him who subjected it in hope.
Because the creation itself will also be freed from the bondage of corruption into the liberty of the glory of the children of God.
For we know that the whole creation is groaning and travailing together until now.
not only so,  also ourselves who have the first fruit of the Spirit. And we ourselves groan within ourselves, waiting for adoption, the redemption of our body.
For we were saved to hope. But hope that is seen is not hope. For what is seen, why also hope for that?
But if we hope for what we do not see, we wait through patience.
likewise also the Spirit helps our weaknesses, for we know not what we would pray for as we ought,  the Spirit itself intercedes for us with inexpressible groanings.
he who searches the hearts knows what is the mentality of the Spirit, because he appeals to God for the sanctified.
we know that all things work together for good to those who love God, who are the called according to purpose.
Because whom he foreknew, he also predestined to be of similar nature of the form of his Son, in order for him to be the firstborn son among many brothers.
whom he predestined, these he also called,  whom he called, these he also made righteous,  whom he made righteous, these he also glorified.
What then will we say to these things? If God is for us, who is against us?
He who did not even spare his own Son,  delivered him up for us all, how will he not also give us all things with him?
Who will accuse against the chosen of God? God is he who makes righteous.
Who is he who will condemn? It is Christ who died,  more, who also was raised up, who also is at the right hand of God, who also appeals for us.
Who will separate us from the love of Christ? Will tribulation, or restriction, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword?
Just as it is written, For thy sake we are killed the whole day long. We are considered as sheep of slaughter.
But in all these things we are more than conquerors through him who loved us.
For I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor agents, nor principal positions, nor powers, nor things that have come, nor things that are coming,
nor height, nor depth, nor any other creation, will be able to separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus our Lord.
I say the truth in Christ, I do not lie, my conscience testifying to me in the Holy Spirit,
that great distress is in me,  unceasing sorrow in my heart.
For I wished I myself to be accursed from the Christ, for my brothers, my kinsmen according to flesh,
who are Israelites, of whom is the adoption,  the glory,  the covenants,  the lawgiving,  the divine service,  the promises,
of whom are the fathers,  from whom (according to flesh) is the Christ, God who is over all is blessed into the ages. Truly.
But it is not as that the word of God has failed. For all those from Israel, these are not Israel,
nor, because they are Abraham's seed, are they all children, rather, In Isaac a seed will be called for thee.
That is, the children of the flesh, these are not children of God, instead, the children of the promise are reckoned for seed.
For this is the word of promise: At this time I will come,  there will be a son by Sarah.
not only so,  also Rebecca having bed from one man, our father Isaac
for not yet having been born, nor having done anything good or bad, that the purpose of God according to selection might remain, not from works,  from him who calls),
it was said to her, The older will serve the younger.
As it is written, Jacob I loved,  Esau I regarded inferior.
What will we say then? Is there injustice from God? May it not happen!
For he says to Moses, I will be merciful to whom I may be merciful,  I will be compassionate to whomever I may be compassionate.
So then it is not of him who wills, nor of him who runs,  of God who is merciful.
For the scripture says to Pharaoh, For this same thing I raised thee up, that I might display in thee my power,  that my name might be proclaimed in all the earth.
So then he is merciful to whom he will,  whom he will he hardens.
Thou will say to me therefore, Why does he still find fault? For who has resisted his purpose?
Rather, O man, who are thou answering back to God? No, will the thing formed say to him who formed it, Why did thou make me this way?
Or has the potter no right over the clay, from the same lump certainly to make this vessel for esteem,  that for disesteem?
if God, wanting to show his wrath,  to make his power known, endured with much longsuffering vessels of wrath prepared for destruction,
even that he might make known the wealth of his glory upon vessels of mercy, which he previously prepared for glory,
namely us whom he called, not only from Jews but also from Gentiles.
As also he says in Hosea, I will call those not my people, my people,  her who was not beloved, beloved.
it will be in the place where it was said to them, Ye are not my people, there they will be called, sons of the living God.
Isaiah cries out concerning Israel, If the number of the sons of Israel may be as the sand of the sea, the remnant will be saved.
Since he is completing and finishing quickly a matter in righteousness, because a matter that has been cut short upon the earth, the Lord will perform.
just as Isaiah has foretold, Unless the Lord of hosts had left us a seed, we would have become as Sodom,  would have been made like Gomorrah.
What will we say then? That the Gentiles who did not pursue righteousness, attained righteousness, even the righteousness from faith.
But Israel who pursued a law of righteousness, did not arrive to a law of righteousness.
Why? Because it was not from faith but as from works of law. For they stumbled at the stone of stumbling,
just as it is written, Behold, I lay in Zion a stone of stumbling and a rock of offense. And every man who believes in him will not be shamed.
Brothers, truly my heart's desire and my supplication to God for Israel is for salvation.
For I testify to them that they have a zeal of God,  not according to knowledge.
For not understanding the righteousness of God,  seeking to establish their own righteousness, they did not submit to the righteousness of God.
For Christ is the end of law for righteousness, to every man who believes.
For Moses writes in the righteousness from the law, that the man that does them will live in them.
But the righteousness from faith says thus: Thou should not say in thy heart, Who will ascend into heaven? (that is, to bring Christ down)
or, Who will descend into the abyss? (that is, to bring Christ up from the dead).
But what does it say? The word is near thee, in thy mouth and in thy heart, that is, the word of faith that we preach:
that if thou will confess with thy mouth, the Lord Jesus,  will believe in thy heart that God raised him from the dead, thou will be saved.
For a man believes in the heart for righteousness,  he confesses with the mouth for salvation.
For the scripture says, Every man who believes in him will not be shamed.
For there is no distinction of a Jew and also of a Greek, for the same Lord is of all men, being rich toward all those who call upon him.
For every man, whoever may call upon the name of the Lord will be saved.
How then will they call on whom they have not believed? And how will they believe of whom they have not heard? And how will they hear without preaching?
how will they preach unless they are sent? Just as it is written, How beautiful are the feet of those who proclaim good news of peace, of those who proclaim good news of good things.
But not all were obedient to the good news, for Isaiah says, Lord, who has believed our report?
So faith is from hearing,  hearing by the word of God.
But I say, did they, no, not hear? Rather, Their voice went forth into all the earth,  their sayings to the limits of the inhabited world.
But I say, did Israel, no, not know? First Moses says, I will provoke you to jealousy toward a non-nation. Toward a foolish nation, I will make you angry.
Isaiah is very bold and says, I was found by those not seeking me. I became manifest to those not asking for me.
But to Israel he says, The whole day I stretched forth my hands to a disobedient and rebellious people.
I say therefore, did God thrust away his people? May it not happen! For I also am an Israelite from the seed of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin.
God did not thrust away his people whom he foreknew. Or know ye not what the scripture tells by Elijah? How he encounters God about Israel.
Lord, they have killed thy prophets,  they have torn down thine altars,  I am left alone,  they seek my life.
But what does the divine response say to him? I have reserved for myself seven thousand men who have not bowed a knee to Baal.
So then also at this present time there has become a remnant according to the selection of grace.
if it is by grace, it is no longer from works, otherwise grace becomes no longer grace. But if it is from works it is no longer grace, otherwise work is no longer work.
What then? What Israel seeks, this it did not obtain. But the chosen obtained it,  the rest were hardened,
just as it is written that God gave them a spirit of slumber: eyes not to see,  ears not to hear, until this very day.
David says, Let their table become for a snare,  for a trap,  for a stumbling block,  for a retribution to them.
Let their eyes be darkened, not to see,  may thou bow down their back always.
I say then, did they stumble so that they would fall? May it not happen! But in their transgression, salvation is to the Gentiles, in order to provoke them to jealousy.
Now if their transgression is wealth of the world,  their failure is wealth of Gentiles, how much more their fullness?
For I speak to you the Gentiles. Inasmuch as I am indeed an apostle of Gentiles, I enhance my ministry,
if somehow I may provoke my flesh to jealousy and may save some of them.
For if the casting away of them is reconciliation of the world, what is the acceptance except life from the dead?
if the first fruit is holy, the branch is also. And if the root is holy, the branches are also.
if some of the branches were broken off,  thou, being a wild olive tree, were grafted in among them,  became a joint partaker of the root of the fatness of the olive tree,
do not boast against the branches. But if thou boast, thou do not bear the root,  the root thee.
Thou will therefore say, Branches were broken off so that I might be grafted in.
Correct! They were broken off for their unbelief,  thou stand by thy faith. Be not high-minded but fear,
for if God spared not the natural branches, perhaps neither will he spare thee.
Behold therefore the goodness and the severity of God. Indeed toward those who fell, severity,  toward thee, goodness, if thou continue in his goodness, otherwise thou too will be cut off.
also those, if they do not continue in their unbelief, will be grafted in, for God is able to graft them in again.
For if thou were cut from what is by nature a wild olive tree,  were grafted contrary to nature into a cultivated olive tree, how much more will these, the natural ones, be grafted into their own olive tree.
For I do not want you, brothers, to be ignorant of this mystery, lest ye should be wise according to yourselves, that a callousness in part has happened to Israel until the fullness of the Gentiles come in.
so all Israel will be saved, as it is written, The man who delivers will come from Zion,  will turn away impiety from Jacob.
this is the covenant from me to them when I will take away their sins.
They are indeed enemies toward the good news for your sake,  toward selection, they are beloved for the fathers' sake.
For the gifts and the calling of God are irrevocable.
For as ye once were also disobedient to God,  now have received mercy at the disobedience of these,
so also now these have been disobedient for thy mercy, so that they also may receive mercy.
For God has confined all men in disobedience, so that he might be merciful to all.
O the depth of wealth, both of the wisdom and the knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his judgments,  his ways beyond finding out!
For who has known the mind of the Lord? Or who became his counselor?
Or who first gave to him,  it will be repaid to him?
Because from him,  through him,  for him, are all things. To him is the glory into the ages. Truly.
I beseech you therefore, brothers, by the mercies of God, to present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, your reasonable service.
be not conformed to this age,  be ye transformed by the renewal of your mind, for ye to approve what is the good and acceptable and perfect will of God.
For I say, through the grace that was given me, to every man who is among you, not to over think beyond what he ought to think,  to think so as to think soundly, as God has apportioned to each man a measure of faith.
For just as we have many body-parts in one body,  all the body-parts have not the same function,
so we, the many, are one body in Christ,  each one body-parts of each other.
having different gifts according to the grace that was given to us, whether prophecy, according to the proportion of faith;
or service, in the service; or he who teaches, in the teaching;
or he who exhorts, in the exhortation; he who gives, in simplicity; he who leads, in diligence; he who does mercy, in cheerfulness.
Love without hypocrisy, abhorring what is evil, clinging to what is good,
with brotherly love toward each other, affectionate, leading each other in recognition,
not lazy in diligence, being fervent in the Spirit serving the Lord,
rejoicing in hope, enduring tribulation, persevering in prayer,
sharing for the needs of the sanctified, pursuing love for strangers.
Bless those who persecute you. Bless ye and do not curse.
Rejoice with those who rejoice, weep with those who weep,
thinking the same way toward each other, not thinking on lofty things,  accommodating to the lowly. Become not wise according to yourselves,
rendering to no man evil for evil, premeditating things right in the sight of all men.
If possible from you, keeping peace with all men,
not avenging yourselves, beloved,  give place to wrath, for it is written, Vengeance is for me, I will repay, says the Lord.
Therefore if thine enemy is hungry, feed him. If he is thirsty, give him to drink. For by doing this thou will heap coals of fire upon his head.
Be thou not overcome by evil,  overcome evil by good.
Let every soul be subject to offices of authority that rank higher. For there is no office of authority if not by God,  the offices of authority that are by God are those that have been instituted.
So that he who resists the office of authority has opposed the ordinance of God,  those who have opposed will receive condemnation to themselves.
For rulers are not a source of fear to the good works,  to the evil. And do thou desire not to fear the office of authority? Do what is good,  thou will have praise from it.
For he is a helper of God to thee for what is good. But if thou do what is evil, be afraid, for he does not bear the sword in vain. For he is a helper of God, vengeful for wrath to the man who commits evil.
Therefore there is a need to be subordinate, not only because of the wrath,  also because of the conscience.
For because of this ye also fulfill taxes, for they are servants of God being devoted to this same thing.
Render therefore to all, the things due: tax to the man of tax, tribute to the man of tribute, fear to the man of fear, esteem to the man of esteem.
Owe no man anything except to love each other, for he who loves the other has fulfilled law.
For this, Thou shall not commit adultery, Thou shall not murder, Thou shall not steal, Thou shall not testify falsely, Thou shall not covet,  if there be any other commandment it is summarized in this saying, in, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself.
Love works no evil to the neighbor. Therefore love is the fulfillment of law.
this, knowing the time, that the hour is now for us to awake out of sleep. For our salvation is now nearer than when we believed.
The night has advanced and the day has approached. Let us therefore cast off the works of darkness,  let us put on the weapons of light.
Let us walk decently as in the day, not in revelry and drunkenness, not in beddings and wantonness, not in strife and envy.
But clothe on the Lord Jesus Christ,  make no forethought for lusts of the flesh.
But the man who is weak in the faith, do not receive for arguments of opinions.
One man has faith to eat all things,  he who is weak eats vegetables.
The man who eats should not disdain the man who does not eat,  the man who does not eat should not criticize the man who eats, for God has received him.
Who are thou who criticizes the servant of another? To his own lord he stands or falls. And he will be made to stand, for God is able to make him stand.
One man prefers one day above another, another man prefers every day. Let each man be fully persuaded in his own mind.
He who regards the day, regards it for the Lord. And he who does not regard the day, for the Lord he does not regard it. And he who eats, eats for the Lord, for he expresses thanks to God. And he who does not eat, for the Lord he does not eat,  expresses thanks to God.
For none of us lives to himself,  no man dies to himself.
For both if we live, we live for the Lord,  if we die, we die for the Lord. Both if we live and if we die, therefore, we are the Lord's.
For because of this Christ both died and arose,  he became alive so that he might be Lord over both the dead and the living.
But why do thou criticize thy brother? Or also why do thou disdain thy brother? For we will all stand before the judgment seat of Christ.
For it is written, I live, says the Lord, that every knee will bow to me,  every tongue will confess to God.
So then each of us will give account about himself to God.
Let us not therefore criticize each other any more,  judge ye this instead, not to place a stumbling block to the brother, or a snare.
I know and am persuaded in the Lord Jesus, that nothing is profane by itself, except to him who regards anything to be profane. To that man it is profane.
For if thy brother is distressed because of food, thou no longer walk according to love. Do not destroy with thy food that man for whom Christ died.
Therefore do not let your good be maligned.
For the kingdom of God is not eating and drinking,  righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Spirit.
For he who serves Christ in these things is acceptable to God,  approved by men.
So then we should pursue the things of peace,  the things of constructiveness for each other.
Do not tear down the work of God because of food. All things indeed are clean,  it is wrong to the man who eats through hindrance.
It is good not to eat meats, nor to drink wine, nor in whatever thy brother stumbles against, or is caused to stumble, or becomes weak.
The faith thou have, have in relation to thyself before God. Blessed is the man not condemning himself in what he allows.
But he who doubts is condemned if he eats, because it is not from faith,  everything that is not from faith is sin.
Now we the strong ought to bear the weaknesses of the frail,  not to please ourselves.
Let each of us please his neighbor for what is good toward edification.
For Christ also did not please himself,  as it is written, The reproaches of those who reproached thee fell upon me.
For as many things as were written previously were written for our learning, so that through perseverance and through the encouragement of the scriptures we might have hope.
Now may the God of perseverance and of encouragement grant you to think the same way among each other, in accord with Christ Jesus,
so that unanimously, with one mouth, ye may glorify the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Therefore receive ye each other, just as Christ also received you for the glory of God.
I say, Christ Jesus became a helper of men of circumcision, for the sake of God's truth (in order to confirm the promises of the fathers),
the Gentiles, for the sake of mercy, to glorify God, as it is written, Because of this I will give thanks to thee among Gentiles,  will sing to thy name.
again he says, Rejoice, O Gentiles, with his people.
again, Praise ye the Lord all nations,  let all the peoples praise him.
again, Isaiah says, There will be the root of Jesse,  he who arises to reign over Gentiles. In him Gentiles will hope.
Now may the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, for ye to abound in hope in the power of the Holy Spirit.
I also myself am persuaded about you, my brothers, that ye yourselves are also full of goodness, filled with all knowledge, able also to admonish others.
But I wrote more boldly to you, brothers, in part, as reminding you because of the grace that was given to me by God,
for me to be a minister of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles, serving the good news of God like a priest, so that the offering up of the Gentiles might become acceptable, being sanctified in the Holy Spirit.
I have therefore a boast in Christ Jesus in things toward God.
For I will not dare to speak anything of which Christ did not accomplish through me for the obedience of Gentiles, by word and work,
in the power of signs and wonders, in the power of a Spirit of God, so that for me, from Jerusalem and all around as far as Illyricum, to fully preach the good news of Christ.
thus having aspired to proclaim the good news not where Christ was already named, so that I would not build upon a foundation belonging to another man,
but, as it is written, They will see to whom it was not reported about him,  they will understand who have not heard.
Therefore also, I was delayed these many times coming to you.
But now, having no more place in these regions,  having a great desire from many years to come to you,
whenever I go to Spain I will come to you. For I hope to see you while passing through,  there to be helped on the way by you, if first I may be partly satisfied from you.
But now I am going to Jerusalem serving the sanctified.
For Macedonia and Achaia were pleased to make a certain participation for the poor of the sanctified at Jerusalem.
For they were pleased. And they are debtors of them, for if the Gentiles were partakers in their spiritual things, they are obligated also to serve them in the carnal things.
Having therefore completed this,  having sealed this fruit for them, I will depart by you to Spain.
I know that when I come to you, I will come in the fullness of the blessing of the good news of the Christ.
Now I beseech you, brothers, by our Lord Jesus Christ and by the love of the Spirit, to strive with me in prayers to God for me.
So that I may be rescued from those who are disobedient in Judea,  that my service for Jerusalem may become acceptable to the sanctified,
so that I may come to you in joy through the will of God,  be rested with you.
the God of peace is with you all. Truly.
Now I commend to you our sister Phoebe who is a helper of the congregation at Cenchreae,
so that ye may welcome her in the Lord worthily of the sanctified,  that ye provide for her in whatever matter she may have need of you, for she also became a helper of many,  of me myself.
Salute Prisca and Aquila my co-workmen in Christ Jesus
who laid down their own neck for my life, to whom not only I thank,  also all the congregations of the Gentiles),  the congregation associated with their house.
Salute Epaenetus my beloved who is the first fruit of Achaia for Christ.
Salute Mary who labored many things for us.
Salute Andronicus and Junias, my kinsmen and my fellow prisoners who are notable men among the apostles, who also became in Christ before me.
Salute Ampliatus my beloved in the Lord.
Salute Urbanus our co-workman in Christ,  Stachys my beloved.
Salute Apelles, a man reliable in Christ. Salute the men from those of Aristobulus.
Salute Herodion my kinsman. Salute the men from those of Narcissus who are in the Lord.
Salute Tryphaena and Tryphosa, the women who labor in the Lord. Salute the beloved Persis who labored many things in the Lord.
Salute Rufus the chosen in the Lord,  his mother and mine.
Salute Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermes, Patrobas, Hermas,  the brothers with them.
Salute Philologus and Julia, Nereus and his sister,  Olympas,  all the sanctified with them.
Salute each other by a holy kiss. The congregations of Christ salute you.
Now I beseech you, brothers, watch out for those who make the divisions and the stumbling blocks, contrary to the doctrine that ye learned,  turn away from them.
For such kind serve not our Lord Jesus Christ,  their own belly. And by their smooth words and elegant speech they deceive the hearts of the naive.
For your obedience reached to all men. Therefore I rejoice over you,  I want you to be indeed wise in the good and pure in the evil.
the God of peace will crush Satan under your feet shortly. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ is with you.
Timothy my co-workman,  Lucius and Jason and Sosipater, my kinsmen, salute you.
I Tertius, the man who transcribed the letter, salute you in the Lord.
Gaius my host,  of the whole congregation, salutes you. Erastus, the manager of the city, salutes you,  Quartus the brother.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ is with all of you. Truly.
Now to him who is able to establish you according to my good news,  the preaching of Jesus Christ according to a revelation of the mystery that has been kept secret for eternal times,
but that was now revealed,  by prophetic scriptures, according to a commandment of the eternal God that was made known to all the nations for obedience of faith,
to the only wise God through Jesus Christ, to whom is the glory into the ages. Truly.
I Corinthians
Cor. Paul, a called apostle of Jesus Christ through the will of God,  Sosthenes the brother,
Cor. to the congregation of God that is at Corinth, to called men, to holy men who have been sanctified in Christ Jesus with all in every place who call upon the name of our the Lord Jesus Christ-both ours and theirs.
Cor. Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Cor. I thank my God always about you, for the grace of God that was given you in Christ Jesus,
Cor. that in everything ye were enriched in him, in all speech and in all knowledge.
Cor. Just as the testimony of Christ was confirmed in you,
Cor. so that ye come behind in not one gift, waiting for the revealing of our Lord Jesus Christ,
Cor. who will also confirm you until the end, irreproachable in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Cor. God is faithful through whom ye were called for the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord.
Cor. Now I beseech you, brothers, through the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing,  there be no divisions among you,  ye may be thoroughly prepared in the same mind and in the same understanding.
Cor. For it was declared to me about you, my brothers, by those of Chloe, that there are contentions among you.
Cor. Now I say this. That each of you actually say, I am of Paul,  I of Apollos,  I of Cephas,  I of Christ.
Cor. Has Christ been divided? Was Paul crucified for you, or were ye immersed in the name of Paul?
Cor. I thank God that I immersed none of you except Crispus and Gaius,
Cor. lest some man should say that I immersed in my name.
Cor. And I also immersed the household of Stephanas. Besides, I know not whether I immersed any other.
Cor. For Christ sent me not to immerse,  to preach the good news, not in wisdom of speech lest the cross of Christ would be emptied.
Cor. For the message of the cross is of course foolishness to those who are perishing,  to us who are being saved it is a power of God.
Cor. For it is written, I will destroy the wisdom of the wise,  I will frustrate the understanding of those of understanding.
Cor. Where is a wise man? Where is a scholar? Where is a researcher of this age? Did not God make foolish the wisdom of this world?
Cor. For since in the wisdom of God the world did not know God through its wisdom, it pleased God through the foolishness of preaching to save those who believe.
Cor. And because Jews demand a sign and Greeks search for wisdom,
Cor. but we proclaim Christ crucified, it is truly to Jews a stumbling-block and to Gentiles foolishness.
Cor. But to them, to the called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ is the power of God and the wisdom of God.
Cor. Because the foolishness of God is wiser than men,  the weak thing of God is stronger than men.
Cor. For notice your calling, brothers, that not many are wise according to flesh, not many powerful, not many eminent.
Cor. But God chose the foolish things of the world, so that he might humiliate the wise,  God chose the weak things of the world, so that he might humiliate the powerful.
Cor. And God chose the common things of the world,  the disdained things,  the things that are not, so that he might make useless the things that are,
Cor. so that no flesh may boast before God.
Cor. But ye are his, in Christ Jesus, who became for us wisdom from God,  righteousness and sanctification and redemption,
Cor. so that, just as it is written, He who boasts, let him boast in the Lord.
Cor. And I, brothers, when I came to you, came not in eminence of speech or of wisdom proclaiming the testimony of God to you.
Cor. For I determined not to know anything among you except Jesus Christ, even this crucified man.
Cor. And I was with you in weakness,  in fear,  in much trembling.
Cor. And my speech and my preaching were not in persuasive words of human wisdom,  in demonstration of the Spirit and of power,
Cor. so that your faith would not be in wisdom of men,  in the power of God.
Cor. But we speak wisdom among the fully developed,  not a wisdom of this age, nor of the rulers of this age who come to nothing.
Cor. But we speak a wisdom of God in a hidden mystery, which God predestined before the ages for our glory,
Cor. which none of the rulers of this age have known. For if they had known, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory.
Cor. But as it is written, What an eye has not seen,  an ear has not heard,  have not arisen in a heart of a man, are things that God prepared for those who love him.
Cor. But God disclosed it to us through his Spirit, for the Spirit searches all things, even the deep things of God.
Cor. For what man knows the things of the man, except the spirit of the man in him? And so nobody knows the things of God except the Spirit of God.
Cor. But we did not receive the spirit of the world,  the Spirit from God, so that we might know the things graciously given to us by God.
Cor. Which things also we speak, not in things learned from mankind, in words of wisdom,  in things learned from the Holy Spirit, comparing spiritual things with spiritual things.
Cor. Now the natural man does not accept the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness to him,  he is unable to understand because they are evaluated spiritually.
Cor. But truly the spiritual man evaluates all things,  he himself is evaluated by none.
Cor. For who has known the mind of the Lord that he will stand with him? But we have the mind of Christ.
Cor. And I, brothers, could not speak to you as to spiritual,  as to carnal, as to the childlike in Christ.
Cor. I gave you milk to drink and not solid food, for ye were not yet able. But not even yet are ye able,
Cor. for ye are still carnal. For whereas among you is envy and strife and divisions, are ye not carnal and walk according to man?
Cor. For while one may say, I am of Paul,  another, I am of Apollos, are ye not carnal?
Cor. Who therefore is Paul and who is Apollos? But rather helpers through whom ye believed, even as the Lord gave to each man.
Cor. I planted, Apollos watered,  God caused growth.
Cor. So then neither is he who plants anything, nor he who waters,  God who causes growth.
Cor. Now he who plants and he who waters are one,  each man will receive his own payment according to his own labor.
Cor. For we are co-workmen of God. Ye are a tillage of God, an edifice of God.
Cor. According to the grace of God that was given to me, as a wise master builder, I laid a foundation and another man is building on it. But let each man take heed how he is building on it.
Cor. For no man can lay another foundation besides that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ.
Cor. And if any man builds upon this foundation, gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, straw,
Cor. each man's work will become manifest. For the day will make it known, because it is revealed by fire. And the fire will test each man's work of what kind it is.
Cor. If any man's work that he built on will remain, he will receive benefit.
Cor. If any man's work will be burned, he will suffer loss,  he himself will be saved,  so as through fire.
Cor. Know ye not that ye are a temple of God and the Spirit of God dwells in you?
Cor. If any man destroys the temple of God, God will destroy this man, for the temple of God is holy, which ye are.
Cor. Let not one man deceive himself. If any man among you seems to be wise in this age, let him become foolish so that he may become wise.
Cor. For the wisdom of this world is foolishness before God. For it is written, He who catches the wise in their craftiness,
Cor. and again, The Lord knows the thoughts of the wise that they are vain.
Cor. Therefore let not one man boast in men. For all things are yours,
Cor. whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things coming, all are yours,
Cor. and ye are Christ's,  Christ is God's.
Cor. Thus let a man regard us as of helpers of Christ,  managers of mysteries of God.
Cor. And beyond that, it is sought in managers that any man should be found faithful.
Cor. But it is a very small thing to me that I might be appraised by you or by a day of mankind. Yet neither do I appraise myself,
Cor. for I know nothing on myself. Yet I have not been made righteous in this,  he who appraises me is the Lord.
Cor. Therefore do not judge anything before the time, until the Lord comes who will both bring to light the hidden things of darkness,  make public the deliberations of the hearts. And then praise will come to each man from God.
Cor. Now these things, brothers, I applied to myself and Apollos for your sakes, so that in us ye might learn not to think above that which is written, so that ye may not be puffed up, one over the one against the other.
Cor. For who makes thee different? And what have thou that thou did not receive? And also if thou received it, why do thou boast as not having received it?
Cor. Already ye are filled. Already ye have become rich. Ye reigned without us,  O that ye did indeed reign, so that we also might reign with you.
Cor. For I think God has exhibited us the apostles least, as men sentenced to die, because we became a spectacle to the world, both to agents and to men.
Cor. We are foolish for the sake of Christ,  ye are wise in Christ. We are weak,  ye are strong. Ye are esteemed,  we are disreputable.
Cor. As far as the present hour we both hunger,  thirst,  are ill clothed,  are treated roughly,  are homeless.
Cor. And we toil, working with our own hands. Being reviled, we bless; being persecuted, we endure;
Cor. being slandered, we entreat. We became as trash of the world, an offscouring of all things, until now.
Cor. I do not write these things shaming you,  I warn you as my beloved children.
Cor. For though ye have countless instructors in Christ, yet not many fathers. For in Christ Jesus I begot you through the good news.
Cor. I beseech you therefore, become followers of me.
Cor. Because of this I sent Timothy to you, who is my beloved and faithful child in the Lord, who will remind you of my ways in Christ, just as I teach everywhere in every congregation.
Cor. But as of me not coming to you, some men are puffed up.
Cor. But I will come to you shortly, if the Lord should will,  I will know, not the word of those who are puffed up,  the power.
Cor. For the kingdom of God is not in word,  in power.
Cor. What do ye want? Should I come to you with a rod, or in love and a spirit of meekness?
Cor. Fornication is actually heard among you,  such fornication that is not even named among the Gentiles, for some man to have his father's wife.
Cor. And ye are puffed up and did not rather mourn, so that he who committed this deed might be taken away from the midst of you.
Cor. For I truly, as being absent in the body but present in the spirit, I have already, as though present, judged the man who committed this thing this way.
Cor. In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when ye are gathered together,  my spirit with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ,
Cor. to deliver such a man to Satan for destruction of the flesh, so that the spirit might be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.
Cor. Your boasting is not good. Know ye not that a little leaven leavens the whole lump?
Cor. Purge out the old leaven, so that ye may be a new lump, since ye are unleavened. For also Christ our Passover was sacrificed for us.
Cor. Therefore we should feast, not by old leaven, nor by leaven of evil and wickedness,  by non-leaven of sincerity and truth.
Cor. I wrote to you in the letter not to associate with fornicators,
Cor. and not at all with the fornicators of this world, or with greedy men, or with predators, or with idolaters, since then ye would need to go out of the world.
Cor. But now I write to you not to associate if any man who is called a brother is a fornicator, or a greedy man, or an idolater, or a slanderer, or a drunkard, or a predator, not even to eat with such kind.
Cor. For what is in me to also judge those outside? Do ye not judge those inside?
Cor. But God judges those outside. And ye yourselves shall drive out the evil man from you.
Cor. Dare any of you, having a matter against the other, go to law before the unrighteous and not before the sanctified?
Cor. Or know ye not that the sanctified will judge the world? And if the world is judged by you, are ye unworthy of very small legal disputes?
Cor. Know ye not that we will judge agents? Then why not mundane things?
Cor. Indeed therefore whenever ye have mundane legal disputes, men who are disdained by the church, these ye seat to judge.
Cor. I speak shame about you. So there is not among you not even one wise man who will be able to arbitrate between his brother?
Cor. But brother goes to law against brother,  this before unbelievers?
Cor. Now therefore it is indeed altogether a defeat for you because ye have legal disputes against yourselves. Why not rather be wronged? Why not rather be defrauded?
Cor. Instead ye do wrong,  defraud,  these things to brothers.
Cor. Or know ye not that the unrighteous will not inherit the kingdom of God? Be not led astray. Neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate men, nor homosexuals,
Cor. nor greedy men, nor thieves, nor drunkards, nor the slanderous, nor the predatory will inherit the kingdom of God.
Cor. And some of you were these things,  ye were washed,  ye were sanctified,  ye were made righteous in the name of the Lord Jesus,  in the Spirit of our God.
Cor. All things are lawful for me,  not all things are expedient. All things are lawful for me,  I will not be brought under control by anything.
Cor. The foods are for the belly and the belly for foods,  God will abolish both this and these things. But the body is not for fornication,  for the Lord,  the Lord for the body.
Cor. And God both raised up the Lord and will raise us up through his power.
Cor. Know ye not that your bodies are body-parts of Christ? Therefore, having taken the body-parts of the Christ, should I make them body-parts of a harlot? May it not happen!
Cor. Or know ye not that he who is joined to a harlot is one body? For, The two, he says, will be in one flesh.
Cor. But he who is joined to the Lord is one spirit.
Cor. Flee fornication. Every sin, whatever a man may do, is outside the body,  he who fornicates sins against his own body.
Cor. Or know ye not that your body is a temple of the Holy Spirit in you, which ye have from God? And ye are not your own,
Cor. for ye were bought with a price. Therefore glorify God in your body and your spirit, which is of God.
Cor. Now concerning the things of which ye wrote to me. It is good for a man not to touch a woman.
Cor. But because of fornications, let each man have his own wife,  let each woman have her own husband.
Cor. Let the husband render the goodwill owed to the wife,  likewise also the wife to the husband.
Cor. The wife has not the right of her private body,  the husband,  likewise also the husband has not the right of his private body,  the wife.
Cor. Do not defraud each other except from agreement for a time, so that ye may have time for fasting and prayer. And come together again for the same thing, so that Satan not tempt you because of your lack of self-control.
Cor. But I say this from concession not from commandment.
Cor. For I wish all men to be even as myself. However each man has his own gift from God, one in this way,  another after that.
Cor. But I say to the unmarried and to the widows, it is good for them if they remain even as I.
Cor. But if they have no self-control they should marry, for it is better to marry than to burn.
Cor. And to those who are married, I do not command but the Lord. The wife is not to separate from her husband.
Cor. But even if she separates, she shall remain unmarried, or be reconciled to her husband. And a husband is not to leave his wife.
Cor. But to the rest I say, not the Lord. If any brother has an unbelieving wife,  this woman consents to dwell with him, he should not leave her.
Cor. And whichever woman has an unbelieving husband,  he consents to dwell with her, she should not leave him.
Cor. For the unbelieving husband has been sanctified by the wife,  the unbelieving wife has been sanctified by the husband, then otherwise your children are unclean,  now they are holy.
Cor. But if the unbeliever separates, he shall separate. The brother or the sister has not been bound in such things. And God has called us to peace.
Cor. For how do thou know, O wife, whether thou will save thy husband? Or how will thou know, O husband, whether thou will save thy wife?
Cor. Except, as God has distributed to each man, as the Lord has called each, so let him walk. And so I command in all the congregations.
Cor. Was any man called circumcised? He should not become uncircumcised. Was any man called in uncircumcision? He should not be circumcised.
Cor. Circumcision is nothing and uncircumcision is nothing, instead, the keeping of God's commandments.
Cor. Each man, in the situation in which he was called, in this he should remain.
Cor. Were thou called being a bondman? It should not concern thee. However if also thou are able to become free, take advantage of it instead.
Cor. For he who was called in the Lord a bondman is a freedman of the Lord. Likewise also he who was called a free man is a bondman of Christ.
Cor. Ye were bought with a price, become not bondmen of men.
Cor. Brothers, each man, in what he was called, should remain in this before God.
Cor. Now concerning the virgins I have no commandment of the Lord,  I give an opinion, as having obtained mercy from the Lord to be trustworthy.
Cor. I suppose therefore this to be good because of the present distress, that it is good for a man to be this way:
Cor. Are thou bound to a wife? Do not seek separation. Are thou free from a wife? Do not seek a wife.
Cor. But also if thou did marry thou have not sinned,  if the virgin married she has not sinned. Yet such kind will have stress in the flesh,  I spare you.
Cor. But this I say, brothers, the time is shortened. It is the remaining, so that also those who have wives may be as not having,
Cor. and those who weep, as not weeping,  those who rejoice, as not rejoicing,  those who buy, as not possessing,
Cor. and those who use this world, as not making full use, for the form of this world passes away.
Cor. But I want you to be without worry. The unmarried man cares for things of the Lord, how he will please the Lord.
Cor. But he who is married cares for things of the world, how he will please his wife.
Cor. And the wife and the virgin are differentiated. The unmarried woman is concerned for the things of the Lord, so that she may be holy both in body and in spirit. But she who is married is concerned for the things of the world, how she will please her husband.
Cor. And I say this for your own benefit, not that I may cast restraint upon you,  for what is respectable and assiduous toward the Lord, undistracted.
Cor. But if any man thinks to behave improperly toward his virgin, if it is past the best time,  so ought to happen, she should do what she wants, she does not sin, they should marry.
Cor. But he who stands firm in his heart, not having necessity,  has power based upon his own will,  has decided this in his heart, to keep his own celibacy, does well.
Cor. And therefore he who gives in marriage does well,  he who does not give in marriage does better.
Cor. A wife is bound by law as long a time as her husband lives,  also if the husband should sleep, she is free to be married to whom she desires, only in the Lord.
Cor. But she is more blessed if she remains this way according to my opinion. And I also seem to have Spirit of God.
Cor. Now about the things sacrificed to idols. We know that all have knowledge. Knowledge puffs up,  love builds up.
Cor. If any man presumes to know anything, he knows nothing yet as he ought to know.
Cor. But if any man loves God, this man is known by him.
Cor. Therefore about eating the things sacrificed to idols, we know that an idol is nothing in the world,  that there is no other God except one.
Cor. For also since there are things called gods, whether in heaven or on the earth, as there are many gods and many lords,
Cor. yet to us there is one God, the Father, from whom are all things,  we for him,  one Lord, Jesus Christ, through whom are all things,  we through him.
Cor. Nevertheless the knowledge is not in all men,  some, with conscience of the idol until now, eat as sacrificed to idols,  their weak conscience is defiled.
Cor. But food does not present us to God, for neither if we eat are we ahead, nor if we do not eat are we behind.
Cor. But take heed lest somehow this privilege of yours becomes a stumbling-block to those who are weak.
Cor. For if some man sees thee, who has knowledge, dining in an idol-temple, will not his conscience, being weak, be strengthened to eat things sacrificed to idols?
Cor. And by thy knowledge the brother, being weak, will be ruined, for whom Christ died.
Cor. And sinning this way against the brothers,  wounding their weak conscience, ye sin against Christ.
Cor. Therefore if food causes my brother to stumble, I will no, not eat meat into the age, so that I may not cause my brother to stumble.
Cor. Am I not an apostle? Am I not free? Have I not seen Jesus Christ our Lord? Are ye not my work in the Lord?
Cor. If I am not an apostle to others, yet at least I am to you, for ye are the seal of my apostleship in the Lord.
Cor. My defense to those who examine me is this.
Cor. Have we no, not a right to eat and to drink?
Cor. Have we no, not a right to lead about a sister wife, as also the other apostles,  the brothers of the Lord,  Cephas?
Cor. Or have only I and Barnabas no right not to be occupied earning a living?
Cor. Who ever enlists in an army at his own wage? Who plants a vineyard and does not eat from the fruit of it? Or who feeds a flock and does not eat from the milk of the flock?
Cor. Do I say these things according to man, or does not the law also say these things?
Cor. For it is written in the law of Moses thou shall not muzzle an ox threshing grain. Is God concerned about oxen,
Cor. or does he speak altogether for our sake? For our sake, for it was written, He who plows ought to plow with hope,  he who threshes with his hope, with hope to share.
Cor. If we sowed spiritual things to you, is it a great thing if we will reap your carnal things?
Cor. If others are partakers of the right from you, are not we more? Nevertheless we did not use this right,  we cover all things, so that we may not give any hindrance to the good news of the Christ.
Cor. Know ye not that those being employed at the sacred things eat from the temple,  those who serve at the altar are partakers at the altar?
Cor. And so the Lord commanded those who proclaim the good news to live from the good news.
Cor. But I have used none of these things,  I did not write these things so that it should be done to me this way. For it is good for me rather to die, than that any man should make my boasting empty.
Cor. For if I preach the good news, it is not a source of pride for me, for an obligation is laid upon me. And woe is to me if I do not preach the good news.
Cor. For if I do this voluntarily, I have a reward,  if involuntarily, I have been entrusted with a commission.
Cor. What then is my reward? That, while preaching the good news, I may make the good news of the Christ without charge, in order not to make full use of my right in the good news.
Cor. For although being free from all men, I made myself a servant to all, so that I might gain the more.
Cor. And to the Jews I became as a Jew, so that I might gain Jews, to those under law, as under law, so that I might gain those under law,
Cor. to those without law, as without law (not being without law to God,  within law to Christ), so that I might gain men without law.
Cor. To the weak I became as weak, so that I might gain the weak. I have become all things to all men, so that by all means I might save some.
Cor. And I do this for sake of the good news, so that I might become a fellow participant of it.
Cor. Know ye not that those who run in an arena, indeed all run,  one receives the prize? So run that ye may seize it.
Cor. And every man who strives for mastery exercises self-control in all things. Indeed therefore those men do it so that they might obtain a perishable crown,  we an imperishable.
Cor. I therefore run this way, not as aimlessly. I fight this way, not as flaying air.
Cor. But I give my body a black eye and subdue it, lest somehow having preached to others, I myself might become disqualified.
Cor. But I want you not to be ignorant, brothers, that all our fathers were under the cloud,  all passed through the sea,
Cor. and all in Moses were immersed in the cloud and in the sea.
Cor. And they all ate the same spiritual food,
Cor. and they all drank the same spiritual drink, for they drank from a spiritual rock that followed them. And the rock was the Christ.
Cor. However with most of them God was not well pleased, for they were strewn in the wilderness.
Cor. But these things became our examples, for us not to be men who lust for evil things as those also lusted.
Cor. Neither become ye idolaters as some of them, as it is written, The people sat down to eat and drink,  rose up to revel.
Cor. Nor should we fornicate as some of them fornicated,  twenty-three thousand fell in one day.
Cor. Nor should we challenge the Christ as some of them also challenged,  were destroyed by the serpents.
Cor. And ye should not grumble as some of them grumbled,  were destroyed by the destroyer.
Cor. Now all these things happened to those men for examples,  they were written for our admonition, to whom the ends of the ages came.
Cor. Therefore let him who seems to stand take heed lest he fall.
Cor. No temptation has taken you except is common to man. But God is faithful who will not allow you to be tempted above what ye are able,  with the temptation will also make the way to escape, to enable you to endure.
Cor. Therefore, my beloved, flee from idolatry.
Cor. I speak as to wise men, judge ye what I say.
Cor. The cup of the blessing that we bless, is it not a participation of the blood of the Christ? The bread that we break, is it not a participation of the body of the Christ?
Cor. Because we, the many, are one bread, one body, for we are all partakers of the one bread.
Cor. Look at Israel according to flesh. Those who eat the sacrifices, are they not partakers of the altar?
Cor. What therefore do I say, that an idol is anything, or that a sacrifice to an idol is anything?
Cor. Rather, that which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to demons and not to God,  I do not want you to become partakers of demons.
Cor. Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord,  the cup of demons. Ye cannot be partakers of a table of the Lord,  of a table of demons.
Cor. Or do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? Are we stronger than he?
Cor. All things are permitted for me,  not all things are expedient. All things are permitted for me,  not all things are constructive.
Cor. Let not one man seek that of himself,  each man that of the other.
Cor. Eat everything being sold in a meat market, inquiring of nothing because of the conscience,
Cor. for the earth is the Lord's,  the fullness of it.
Cor. If any of those unbelievers invites you,  ye want to go, eat everything being set before you, inquiring of nothing because of the conscience.
Cor. But if any man says to you, This is a sacrifice to an idol, do not eat for the sake of that man who informed,  the conscience, for the earth is the Lord's,  the fullness of it.
Cor. And I say conscience, not the one of himself,  the one of the other man. For why is my liberty judged by another conscience?
Cor. If I partake with thankfulness, why am I maligned about which I express thanks?
Cor. Therefore whether ye eat, or drink, or anything ye do, do all to the glory of God.
Cor. Become ye inoffensive both to Jews and to Greeks,  to the church of God,
Cor. just as I also strive to please in all things for all men, not seeking my own advantage,  that of the many, so that they may be saved.
Cor. Become ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ.
Cor. Now I praise you, brothers, that ye remember me in all things and keep the traditions, just as I delivered them to you.
Cor. But I want you to know that the head of every man is the Christ,  the head of a woman is the man,  the head of Christ is God.
Cor. Every man praying or prophesying having something upon his head dishonors his head.
Cor. But every woman praying or prophesying with her head uncovered dishonors her head, for it is one and the same thing as the woman who has been shaven.
Cor. For if a woman is not covered, let her also shear herself. But if it is an ugly thing for a woman to shear herself or be shaven, she should be covered.
Cor. For a man indeed ought not to cover his head, being an image and glory of God,  woman is a glory of man.
Cor. For man is not from woman,  woman from man.
Cor. For also man was not created for the woman,  woman for the man.
Cor. Because of this the woman ought to have authority over her head, because of the agents.
Cor. Nevertheless, neither is man independent of woman, nor woman independent of man, in the Lord.
Cor. For just as the woman is from the man, so also the man is through the woman. But all things are from God.
Cor. Judge ye among yourselves, is it proper for a woman to pray to God uncovered?
Cor. Or does not nature itself teach you that if a man actually wears long hair it is a disgrace to him?
Cor. But if a woman wears long hair, it is a glory to her, because her hair has been given for a cloak.
Cor. But if any man appears to be a lover of strife, we have no such custom, nor the congregations of God.
Cor. Now in this that is commanded, I do not praise you, because ye do not assemble for the better but for the worse.
Cor. For indeed first, when ye come together in a congregation, I hear divisions are present among you,  I partly believe it.
Cor. For there must also be factions among you, so that the genuine may become apparent among you.
Cor. When therefore ye come together in the same place, it is not to eat the Lord's supper.
Cor. For each man proceeds to eat his own meal,  one is hungry and another is drunken.
Cor. For have ye no houses to eat and to drink in? Or do ye disparage the church of God,  humiliate those not having? What shall I say to you? Shall I praise you in this? I do not praise you.
Cor. For I received from the Lord what I also delivered to you, that the Lord Jesus in the night in which he was betrayed took bread,
Cor. and having expressed thanks, he broke in pieces,  said, Take ye, eat, this is my body broken for you. This do ye for my memorial.
Cor. Likewise also the cup after the supper, saying, This cup is the new covenant in my blood. This do, as often as ye drink it, for my memorial.
Cor. For as often as ye eat this bread and drink this cup, ye proclaim the Lord's death until he comes.
Cor. Therefore whoever may eat this bread or drink the cup of the Lord unworthily of the Lord, will be guilty of the body and the blood of the Lord.
Cor. But let a man examine himself,  let him so eat of the bread,  drink of the cup.
Cor. For he who eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks condemnation to himself, not discerning the body of the Lord.
Cor. Because of this many are weak and sickly among you,  a considerable sleep.
Cor. But if we were discerning ourselves we would not be judged.
Cor. But when we are judged by the Lord, we are chastened so that we may not be condemned with the world.
Cor. Therefore, my brothers, when ye come together to eat, await each other.
Cor. And if any man is hungry, let him eat at home so that ye may not come together for condemnation. And the rest I will set in order as soon as I come.
Cor. Now concerning the spiritual things, brothers, I do not want you to be ignorant.
Cor. Ye know that, while Gentiles, ye were being carried away to the voiceless idols, as ye were led.
Cor. Therefore I make known to you, that no man speaking by the Spirit of God says, Jesus is accursed,  no man can say, Jesus is Lord, except by the Holy Spirit.
Cor. Now there are varieties of gifts,  the same Spirit.
Cor. And there are varieties of services,  the same Lord.
Cor. And there are varieties of functions,  it is the same God who works all in all.
Cor. But the manifestation of the Spirit is given to each man toward that which is beneficial.
Cor. For to one, the word of wisdom is given through the Spirit,  to another, the word of knowledge according to the same Spirit,
Cor. to a different man, faith by the same Spirit,  to another, gifts of healings by the same Spirit,
Cor. and to another, workings of miracles,  to another, prophecy,  to another, discerning of spirits,  to a different man, kinds of tongues,  to another, the interpretation of tongues.
Cor. But the one and the same Spirit works all these things, distributing to each man individually as it wills.
Cor. For just as the body is one and has many parts,  all the parts of the body, being many, are one body, so also is the Christ.
Cor. For also by one Spirit we are all immersed into one body, whether Jews or Greeks, whether bondmen or freemen,  we were all made to drink into one Spirit.
Cor. For the body also is not one part,  many.
Cor. If the foot should say, Because I am not a hand I am not of the body, it is not by this not of the body.
Cor. And if the ear should say, Because I am not an eye I am not of the body, it is not by this not of the body.
Cor. If the whole body were an eye, where would be the hearing? If the whole were hearing, where would be the smelling?
Cor. But now God has placed the parts, each one of them, in the body just as he intended.
Cor. And if they were all one part, where would be the body?
Cor. But now of course there are many body-parts,  one body.
Cor. And the eye cannot say to the hand, I have no need of thee, nor again the head to the feet, I have no need of you.
Cor. Instead, much more the parts of the body that seem to be more feeble are necessary.
Cor. And those things of the body presumed to be without esteem, we place around these more abundant worth. And our unpresentable parts have more abundant propriety,
Cor. whereas our presentable parts have no need. Instead, God united the body together, having given more abundant worth to the part that lacks,
Cor. so that there would be no schisms in the body,  that the parts would have the same care for each other.
Cor. And if one part suffers, all the parts suffer together, or one part is honored, all the parts rejoice together.
Cor. Now ye are the body of Christ,  body-parts individually.
Cor. And in the church God has placed men who are first apostles, secondly prophets, thirdly teachers, then miracles, then gifts of healings, helps, administrations, kinds of tongues.
Cor. Are all apostles? Are all prophets? Are all teachers? Do all do miracles?
Cor. Do all have gifts of healing? Do all speak with tongues? Do all interpret?
Cor. But be zealous for the better gifts. And yet I show you a more excellent way.
Cor. If I speak with the tongues of men and of agents,  have not love, I have become sounding brass, or a clashing cymbal.
Cor. And if I have prophecy,  know all mysteries and all knowledge,  if I have all faith so as to remove mountains,  have not love, I am nothing.
Cor. And if I dole out all things possessed by me,  if I deliver my body so that I may be burned,  have not love, I benefit nothing.
Cor. Love is patient and is kind. Love does not envy. Love does not brag,  is not puffed up.
Cor. It does not behave improperly, does not seek the things of itself, is not made sharp, does not contemplate evil,
Cor. does not rejoice in wrong but rejoices in the truth,
Cor. covers all things, believes all things, hopes all things, endures all things.
Cor. Love never fails. But whether prophecies, they will be abolished, whether tongues, they will cease, whether knowledge, it will be abolished.
Cor. But we know in part,  we prophesy in part,
Cor. but when the perfect comes, then what is in part will be abolished.
Cor. When I was a child, I spoke as a child, I understood as a child, I reasoned as a child,  when I became a man, I abolished the childish things.
Cor. For now we see by polished metal, in dimness,  then face to face. Now I know in part,  then I will know just as also I was known.
Cor. And now remain faith, hope, love, these three,  the greater of these is love.
Cor. Pursue love,  be zealous for the spiritual things,  more that ye may prophesy.
Cor. For he who speaks in a tongue speaks not to men,  to God, for no man hears,  in spirit he speaks mysteries.
Cor. But he who prophesies speaks to men edification and encouragement and comfort.
Cor. He who speaks in a tongue builds himself up,  he who prophesies builds up the congregation.
Cor. Now I want you all to speak in tongues,  more that ye may prophesy. For greater is he who prophesies than he who speaks in tongues, unless he interprets, so that the congregation may receive edification.
Cor. But now, brothers, if I come to you speaking in tongues, what will I benefit you, unless I would speak to you either in a revelation, or in knowledge, or in prophesying, or in doctrine?
Cor. Likewise lifeless things that give a sound, whether flute or harp, if they give no distinction in the sounds, how will it be known what is being piped or harped?
Cor. For also if a trumpet gives an uncertain sound, who will prepare himself for battle?
Cor. So also ye, unless ye give understandable speech by the tongue, how will that which is spoken be known? For ye will be talking into the air.
Cor. Since there are perhaps, so many kinds of voices in the world,  none of them is without significance.
Cor. If therefore I know not the force of the voice, I will be a foreigner to him who speaks,  he who speaks will be a foreigner to me.
Cor. So also ye, since ye are zealots of spirits, seek so that ye may excel for the edification of the church.
Cor. Therefore let him who speaks in a tongue pray that he may interpret.
Cor. For if I pray in a tongue my spirit prays,  my intellect is unfruitful.
Cor. What is it therefore? I will pray with the spirit,  I will pray with the intellect also. I will sing with the spirit,  I will sing with the intellect also.
Cor. Otherwise if thou would bless with the spirit, how will the man who fills the place of the unlearned, say the Truly at thy thanksgiving, since he knows not what thou say?
Cor. For thou indeed express thanks well,  the other man is not edified.
Cor. I thank my God that I speak in tongues more than all of you.
Cor. Yet in an assembly I would rather speak five words with my intellect, so that I might also make others understand, than countless words in a tongue.
Cor. Brothers, become not children in your thoughts. Instead be childlike in wickedness,  in your thoughts become mature.
Cor. In the law it is written, In other tongues and in other lips I will speak to this people,  not even so will they hear me, says the Lord.
Cor. Therefore tongues are for a sign, not to those who believe,  to the unbelieving. But prophesying is not to the unbelieving,  to those who believe.
Cor. If therefore the whole congregation comes together in the same place,  all speak in tongues,  unlearned or unbelieving men come in, will they not say that ye are mad?
Cor. But if all prophesy,  some unbelieving or unlearned man comes in, he is convicted by all, he is called to account by all.
Cor. And so the secrets of his heart are made manifest. And so having fallen down on his face he will worship God, declaring that God is really among you.
Cor. What is it therefore, brothers? When ye come together, each of you has a psalm, has a teaching, has a tongue, has a revelation, has an interpretation. Let all things be done for edification.
Cor. If any man speaks in a tongue, be according to two, or at the most three,  in succession. And let one interpret.
Cor. But if there is no interpreter, let him keep silence in an assembly,  let him speak to himself and to God.
Cor. And let two or three prophets speak,  let the other men pass judgment.
Cor. But if it should be revealed to another man who is seated, let the first be silent.
Cor. For ye can all prophesy one by one, so that all may learn,  all may be encouraged.
Cor. And the spirits of prophets are subject to prophets,
Cor. for God is not a God of confusion,  of peace.
Cor. As in all the churches of the sanctified, let the women keep silent in the churches. For it is not permitted for them to speak,  to be subordinate, as the law also says.
Cor. And if they want to learn anything, let them question their own husbands at home, for it is an ugly thing for women to speak in an assembly.
Cor. Or did the word of God come forth from you? Or did it come to you only?
Cor. If any man presumes to be a prophet or spiritual, let him acknowledge what I write to you, that they are commandments of the Lord.
Cor. But if any man is ignorant, let him be ignorant.
Cor. Therefore brothers, be zealous for prophesying,  do not forbid to speak in tongues.
Cor. Let all things be done decently and in order.
Cor. And, brothers, I make known to you the good news that I preached to you, which also ye received,  in which ye stand,
Cor. by which also ye are saved if ye hold firm that word I preached to you, unless ye believed in vain.
Cor. For I delivered to you at first what I also received, that Christ died for our sins according to the scriptures,
Cor. and that he was buried,  that he arose on the third day according to the scriptures,
Cor. and that he appeared to Cephas, then to the twelve.
Cor. Then he appeared to over five hundred brothers at once, of whom the greater part remain until now,  some also slept.
Cor. Then he appeared to James, then to all the apostles,
Cor. and last of all, as to the untimely birth, he also appeared to me.
Cor. For I am the least of the apostles, who am not worthy to be called an apostle, because I persecuted the church of God.
Cor. But by the grace of God I am what I am. And his grace for me did not become empty,  I labored more abundantly than them all, yet not I,  the grace of God with me.
Cor. Therefore whether I or those men, so we proclaim,  so ye believed.
Cor. Now if Christ is proclaimed that he has risen from the dead, how say some among you that there is no resurrection of the dead?
Cor. But if there is no resurrection of the dead, neither has Christ risen.
Cor. And if Christ has not risen, then our preaching is empty,  your faith is also empty.
Cor. And also we are found false witnesses of God, because we witnessed according to God that he raised up the Christ, whom he did not raise up, if therefore the dead are really not raised.
Cor. For if the dead are not raised, neither has Christ been raised.
Cor. And if Christ has not been raised, your faith is vain. Ye are still in your sins.
Cor. Then also those who slept in Christ have perished.
Cor. If we are men who have hoped in Christ in this life only, we are of all men more miserable.
Cor. But now Christ has been raised from the dead. He became the first fruit of those who are asleep.
Cor. For since death is because of a man, the resurrection of the dead is also because of a man.
Cor. For as by Adam all die, so also by Christ all will be made alive.
Cor. But each in his own order. Christ the first fruit, then those of Christ at his coming.
Cor. Afterwards the end, when he delivers up the kingdom to the God and Father, when he will abolish all rule,  all authority and power.
Cor. For he must reign until he will put all his enemies under his feet.
Cor. The last enemy abolished is death.
Cor. For he subordinated all things under his feet. But when he says that all things have been subordinated, it is clear that he who subordinated all things under him, is excepted.
Cor. And when all things are made subordinate to him, then the Son himself will also be made subordinate to him who subordinated all things to him, so that God may be all in all.
Cor. Otherwise what will they do who are immersed for the dead? If the dead do not rise at all, why then are they immersed for the dead?
Cor. And we, why are we in peril every hour?
Cor. By the pride that belongs to you, that I keep in Christ Jesus our Lord, I die daily.
Cor. If in respect to men I fought with beasts at Ephesus, what is the benefit to me if the dead are not raised? Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die.
Cor. Be not led astray. Evil associations corrupt good habits.
Cor. Sober up rightly,  do not sin, for some have ignorance of God. I speak shame about you.
Cor. But some man will say, How are the dead raised,  with what kind of body do they come?
Cor. Thou foolish man, what thou sow is not made alive unless it dies.
Cor. And what thou sow, thou do not sow the body that it will become,  a bare grain, if it may happen of wheat, or of some other kind.
Cor. But God gives it a body as he wills,  to each of the seeds its own body.
Cor. All flesh is not the same flesh,  one of men,  another flesh of beasts,  another of fishes,  another of birds,
Cor. and heavenly bodies,  earthly bodies (but the glory of the heavenly is different,  the glory of the earthly is different),
Cor. another glory is of the sun,  another glory of the moon,  another glory of the stars, for star differs from star in glory.
Cor. So also is the resurrection of the dead. It is sown in the perishable, it is raised in imperishability.
Cor. It is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory. It is sown in weakness, it is raised in power.
Cor. It is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body. There is a natural body,  there is a spiritual body.
Cor. And so it is written, The first man Adam developed into a living soul. The last Adam a life giving spirit.
Cor. Nevertheless the spiritual is not first,  the natural, then the spiritual.
Cor. The first man was of the earth, earthly. The second man is the Lord from heaven.
Cor. As is the earthly, such also are the earthly. And as is the heavenly, such also are the heavenly.
Cor. And just as we have worn the form of the earthly, we will also wear the form of the heavenly.
Cor. Now this I affirm, brothers, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God, nor does the perishable inherit imperishability.
Cor. Behold, I tell you a mystery. We will actually not all sleep,  we will all be transformed,
Cor. in an instant, in the blink of an eye, at the last trumpet. For it will sound,  the dead will be raised imperishable,  we will be transformed.
Cor. For this perishable must put on imperishability,  this mortal put on immortality.
Cor. But when this perishable will have put on imperishability,  this mortal will have put on immortality, then will come to pass the saying that is written, Death was swallowed up in victory.
Cor. O death, where is thy sting? O Hades, where is thy victory?
Cor. The sting of death is sin,  the power of sin is the law.
Cor. But thanks is to God who gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.
Cor. Therefore, my beloved brothers, become ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, knowing that your labor is not empty in the Lord.
Cor. Now concerning the collection for the sanctified, as I arranged for the congregations of Galatia, so also do ye.
Cor. Upon the first day of the week let each of you set something aside near himself, storing up whatever he may prosper, so that when I come no collections may be made then.
Cor. And when I arrive, whomever ye may approve by letters, I will send these men to bring your gift to Jerusalem.
Cor. And if it is fitting for me to go also, they will go with me.
Cor. But I will come to you when I pass through Macedonia, for I do pass through Macedonia.
Cor. And it may be that I will remain with you, or I will even spend winter, so that ye may set me on my way wherever I go.
Cor. For I do not want to see you now in passing,  I hope to remain some time with you, if the Lord allows.
Cor. But I will remain at Ephesus until Pentecost.
Cor. For a great and effective door has opened to me,  yet there are many who are hostile.
Cor. But if Timothy comes, see that he becomes without fear with you, for he works the work of the Lord, as I also.
Cor. Let not any man therefore disparage him,  send him forth in peace, so that he may come to me, for I expect him with the brothers.
Cor. And about Apollos the brother, I urged him much that he would come to you with the brothers,  it was not at all his will that he should come now,  he will come when he has opportunity.
Cor. Watch ye, stand firm in the faith, act like men, be strong.
Cor. Let all things of you be done in love.
Cor. Now I beseech you, brothers (ye know the house of Stephanas, that it is the first fruit of Achaia,  that they committed themselves to service for the sanctified),
Cor. that ye also be subject to such men,  to every man working together and laboring.
Cor. And I rejoice at the coming of Stephanas and Fortunatus and Achaicus, because these men filled your lack.
Cor. For they refreshed my spirit and yours. Therefore acknowledge ye such men.
Cor. The congregations of Asia salute you. Aquila and Priscilla salute you much in the Lord, with the congregation associated with their house.
Cor. All the brothers salute you. Salute each other by a holy kiss.
Cor. The salutation of Paul by my hand.
Cor. If any man does not love the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be accursed. Maranatha.
Cor. The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ is with you.
Cor. My love is with you all in Christ Jesus. Truly.
II Corinthians
Cor. Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ through the will of God,  Timothy the brother, to the congregation of God that is at Corinth, with all the sanctified who are in the whole of Achaia.
Cor. Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Cor. Blessed is the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies and God of all encouragement,
Cor. who encourages us in all our affliction, in order for us to be able to encourage those in every affliction, through the encouragement of which we ourselves are encouraged by God.
Cor. Because, as the sufferings of the Christ abound to us, so also our encouragement abounds through the Christ.
Cor. But whether we are oppressed, it is for your encouragement and salvation, which works by endurance from the same sufferings that we also experience (and our hope for you is steadfast), or we are encouraged, it is for your encouragement and salvation,
Cor. knowing that, as ye are partakers of the sufferings, so also of the encouragement.
Cor. For we do not want you to be ignorant, brothers, about our affliction that happened to us in Asia, because we were extraordinarily weighed down, above strength, so as for us to despair even to be alive.
Cor. But we ourselves have had the sentence of death in ourselves, so that we should not be trusting in ourselves,  in God who raises the dead.
Cor. Who rescued us out of so great a death,  does rescue, in whom we have hoped that he will also still rescue.
Cor. And of you who help together by supplication for us (a gift for us from many persons, because of many), so that there may be gratitude about you.
Cor. For our pride is this (the testimony from our conscience), that we behave in the world in the simplicity and purity of God, not by fleshly wisdom but in the grace of God,  especially toward you.
Cor. For we write no other thing to you,  rather what ye read or also acknowledge. And I hope ye will also acknowledge until the end,
Cor. as also ye did acknowledge us in part, because we are your boast, just as ye also are ours in the day of the Lord Jesus.
Cor. And in this confidence I intended to come to you earlier, so that ye might have a second benefit,
Cor. and to pass through you into Macedonia,  to come again from Macedonia to you,  by you to be helped on the way toward Judea.
Cor. Therefore intending this, did I accordingly employ anything in lightness? Or what I decide, do I decide according to flesh, so that it would be with me the yes, yes and the no, no?
Cor. But God is faithful, because our word toward you became not, yes and no.
Cor. For the Son of God, Jesus Christ who was proclaimed among you by us (by me and Silvanus and Timothy) became not, yes and no,  in him has become, yes.
Cor. For as many as be promises of God, in him is the Yes,  in him the Truly, for glory to God through us.
Cor. Now he who establishes us with you in Christ,  who anointed us, is God.
Cor. He also is who put a seal on us,  who gave the pledge of the Spirit in our hearts.
Cor. But I call God for a witness upon my soul, that I did not yet come to Corinth, sparing you.
Cor. Not because we lord over your faith,  are co-workmen of your joy, for by faith ye stand.
Cor. But I determined this in myself, not to come again to you in sadness.
Cor. For if I make you sad, who then is he who makes me glad except he who is made sad by me?
Cor. And I wrote this same thing to you, so that when I came, I would not have sadness from whom I ought to rejoice, having been confident toward you all, because my joy is of all of you.
Cor. For out of much stress and dismay of heart, through many tears, I wrote to you, not that ye would be grieved,  that ye might know the love that I have so much more for you.
Cor. But if any man has caused sadness, he has not caused me sadness,  in part (that I may not bear down) you all.
Cor. Sufficient to such a man is this punishment by the many,
Cor. so that instead, for you rather to forgive and encourage, lest perhaps such a man would be swallowed up with too much sorrow.
Cor. Therefore I beseech you to affirm love for him.
Cor. For I also wrote for this, so that I might know the proof of you, whether ye are obedient in all things.
Cor. But to whom ye forgive anything, I too. For I also, whom I have forgiven (if anything), I have forgiven because of you in the presence of Christ,
Cor. so that we may not be exploited by Satan. For we are not ignorant of his methods.
Cor. Now having come to Troas for the good news of the Christ,  a door having been opened to me in the Lord,
Cor. I had no rest in my spirit, my not finding Titus my brother. But having departed from them, I went forth into Macedonia.
Cor. And thanks is to God who always causes us to triumph in the Christ,  who makes manifest the aroma of the knowledge of him in every place, through us.
Cor. Because we are a fragrance of Christ to God, in those being saved and in those perishing:
Cor. to the one an odor of death for death,  to the other an aroma of life for life. And who is adequate for these things?
Cor. For we are not as other men, huckstering the word of God,  as from purity. But we speak in Christ as from God in the sight of God.
Cor. Are we beginning again to commend ourselves? Unless we need, as some men, commendatory letters to you or commendatory from you?
Cor. Ye are our letter, written in our hearts, known and read by all men,
Cor. being seen that ye are a letter of Christ, administered by us, written not in ink,  in the Spirit of the living God, not in stony tablets,  in fleshly tablets, in hearts.
Cor. And we have such confidence toward God through Christ,
Cor. not that we are sufficient of ourselves to reckon anything as from ourselves,  our sufficiency is from God,
Cor. who also made us qualified helpers of a new covenant, not of a document,  of a Spirit, for the document kills but the Spirit makes alive.
Cor. But if the administration of death in writings engraved on stones occurred in glory, so that the sons of Israel could not gaze upon the face of Moses because of the fading glory of his countenance,
Cor. how will the administration of the Spirit not be more in glory?
Cor. For if the administration of condemnation has glory, the administration of righteousness excels much more in glory.
Cor. For also that which has been glorified, has not been glorified in this regard, because of the glory that transcends.
Cor. For if that which is abolished was through glory, much more that which remains is in glory.
Cor. Having therefore such a hope we use great boldness,
Cor. and are not as Moses. He put a veil over his face in order for the sons of Israel not to gaze on the end of the fading.
Cor. But their minds were hardened, for to this day the same veil remains at the reading of the old testament, not being uncovered, which thing is abolished in Christ.
Cor. But to this day when Moses is read, a veil lies upon their heart.
Cor. But whenever it turns to the Lord, the veil is removed.
Cor. Now the Lord is the Spirit,  where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty.
Cor. But we all, with unveiled face seeing by reflection the glory of the Lord, are transformed into the same likeness from glory to glory, just as from the Spirit of the Lord.
Cor. Because of this (having this ministry), in as much as we received mercy, we do not become discouraged.
Cor. But we have renounced the covert things of shame, not walking in craftiness, nor misrepresenting the word of God,  by the disclosure of the truth, commending ourselves to every conscience of men before God.
Cor. But even if our good news is concealed, it is concealed in those who are perishing,
Cor. in whom the god of this age has blinded the minds of the unbelieving, in order for the light of the good news of the glory of the Christ (who is a likeness of God) not to shine forth to them.
Cor. For we preach not ourselves,  Christ Jesus as Lord,  ourselves are your bondmen through Jesus.
Cor. Because it is God who said, Out of darkness light is to shine, who shone in our hearts for an enlightenment of the knowledge of the glory of God in the presence of Jesus Christ.
Cor. But we have this treasure in earthen vessels, so that the excellence of the power may be of God and not from us,
Cor. restricted in everything, yet not confined, perplexed but not despairing,
Cor. persecuted but not forsaken, cast down but not destroyed.
Cor. Always carrying around in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus, so that also the life of Jesus may be made visible in our body.
Cor. For we who live are always given over to death for Jesus' sake, so that also the life of Jesus may be made visible in our mortal flesh.
Cor. So death indeed works in us,  life in you.
Cor. And having the same spirit of faith, according to that which is written, I believed, therefore I spoke, we also believe,  therefore we speak,
Cor. knowing that he who raised up the Lord Jesus will also raise us up through Jesus,  will present us with you.
Cor. For all things are for your sakes, so that the grace, which has multiplied because of the thankfulness of the many, may abound for the glory of God.
Cor. Therefore we are not discouraged,  even if the outer man of us is perishing, yet the inner man is renewed day by day.
Cor. For our slight momentary affliction works for us an eternal weight of glory from extraordinariness to extraordinariness,
Cor. while we look not at things seen,  at things not seen. For things seen are temporal,  things not seen are eternal.
Cor. For we know that if the earthly house of our tent were destroyed, we have a building from God, a house not made by hands, eternal in the heavens.
Cor. For also in this we groan, longing to clothe ourselves with our habitation from heaven,
Cor. if indeed also having put it on we will not be found naked.
Cor. For also those who are in the tent groan, being burdened, not in that we want to undress,  to clothe ourselves, so that the mortal may be swallowed up by the life.
Cor. Now he who wrought us for this same thing is God, who also gave us the pledge of the Spirit.
Cor. Therefore always being confident,  knowing that while at home in the body we are absent from the Lord,
Cor. for we walk by faith, not by sight.
Cor. And we are confident,  are pleased rather to be absent from the body and to be at home near the Lord.
Cor. Therefore also we aspire, whether at home or away from home, to be well-pleasing to him.
Cor. For we must all appear before the judgment-seat of the Christ, so that each man may receive back about the things that he did through the body, whether good or bad.
Cor. Having seen therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade men. But we have been manifested to God,  I hope also to have been manifested in your consciences.
Cor. For we are not commending ourselves again to you,  giving you an opportunity of boasting about us, so that ye may have for those who boast in appearance and not in heart.
Cor. For whether we are beside ourselves to God, or we are of normal mind, it is for you.
Cor. For the love of Christ holds us together, having judge this, that if one died for all, then all died.
Cor. And he died for all so that those who live would no longer live to themselves,  to him who died for them,  was raised.
Cor. So that henceforth we know no man according to flesh,  even if we have known Christ according to flesh, yet now we know him no longer.
Cor. So then if any man is in Christ, he is a new creation. The old things have passed away, behold, all things have become new.
Cor. And all things are from God who reconciled us to himself through Jesus Christ,  who gave to us the ministry of reconciliation.
Cor. How that God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, not imputing to them their trespasses,  having committed to us the word of reconciliation.
Cor. We are therefore, ambassadors on behalf of Christ, as though God were calling through us. We plead on behalf of Christ, be ye reconciled to God.
Cor. For the man who knew no sin was made sin on our behalf, so that we might become the righteousness of God in him.
Cor. And working jointly, we urge you also not to receive the grace of God in vain
Cor. (for he says, At an acceptable time I heard thee,  in a day of salvation I helped thee. Behold, now is an acceptable time. Behold, now is a day of salvation),
Cor. giving not one cause of stumbling in anything, so that the ministry may not be criticized,
Cor. but in everything commending ourselves as helpers of God, in much perseverance, in afflictions, in necessities, in restrictions,
Cor. in stripes, in imprisonments, in tumults, in labors, in sleeplessness, in hungerings,
Cor. in purity, in knowledge, in longsuffering, in kindness, in the Holy Spirit, in non-hypocritical love,
Cor. in word of truth, in power of God, through the weapons of righteousness of the right hand and of the left,
Cor. through glory and disrepute, through slander and commendation; as deceitful,  yet true;
Cor. as unknown,  well known; as dying,  behold, we live; as punished,  not put to death;
Cor. as grieving,  always rejoicing; as poor,  making many rich; as having nothing,  yet possessing all things.
Cor. O Corinthians, our mouth has been opened to you, our heart has been enlarged.
Cor. Ye are not limited in us,  ye are limited in your bowels.
Cor. But I speak the same recompense as to children, be ye also enlarged.
Cor. Do not become unequally yoked with unbelievers, for what partnership has righteousness and lawlessness? And what fellowship has light with darkness?
Cor. And what agreement has Christ with Belial? Or what share have believers with non-believers?
Cor. And what mutual agreement has a temple of God with idols? For ye are a temple of the living God, just as God said, I will dwell in them,  will walk among them. And I will be their God,  they will be a people to me.
Cor. Therefore, Come ye out from among them,  be ye separated, says the Lord, And touch no unclean thing,  I will receive you
Cor. and will be for a Father to you,  ye will be for sons and daughters to me, says the Lord Almighty.
Cor. Having therefore these promises, beloved, let us cleanse ourselves from every filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in fear of God.
Cor. Make room for us. We wronged no man, we corrupted no man, we exploited no man.
Cor. I speak not for condemnation, for I have said before that ye are in our hearts to die together and to live together.
Cor. Great is my boldness toward you, great is my pride for you. I have been filled with encouragement. I over-abound with joy in all our affliction.
Cor. For even when we came into Macedonia our flesh had not one relief,  being oppressed in everything: battles outside, fears within.
Cor. Nevertheless God, who encourages the lowly, encouraged us by the arrival of Titus.
Cor. And not only by his presence,  also by the encouragement with which he was encouraged by you, reporting to us your earnest desire, your mourning, your zeal for me, so that I rejoiced the more.
Cor. Because even though I grieved you in the letter, I am not remorseful (even though I was remorseful), for I perceive that that letter grieved you, even though for an hour.
Cor. Now I rejoice, not that ye were grieved,  that ye were grieved for repentance. For ye were grieved toward God, so that ye might suffer loss from us in nothing.
Cor. For sorrow toward God works repentance for salvation without regret,  the sorrow of the world works death.
Cor. For behold this same thing-your grieving toward God. How much eagerness it worked in you, even a defense, even indignation, even fear, even longing, even zeal, even vengeance! In everything ye demonstrated yourselves to be pure in the matter.
Cor. And so then, although I wrote to you, it was not because of the man who did wrong, nor because of the man who was wronged,  in order to reveal to you your eagerness for us in the sight of God.
Cor. Because of this we have been encouraged. And from your encouragement, we rejoiced to a greater degree more at the joy of Titus, because his spirit has been refreshed by you all.
Cor. Because, if I have boasted anything to him about you, I am not ashamed,  as we spoke all things in truth to you, so also our boast to Titus became truth.
Cor. And his bowels are more abundant toward you, remembering the obedience of you all, how ye received him with fear and trembling.
Cor. I rejoice that I have confidence in you in everything.
Cor. And, brothers, we declare to you the grace of God that has been given in the congregations of Macedonia,
Cor. that in a great trial of affliction the abundance of their joy, even from the depth of their poverty, abounded for the wealth of their generosity,
Cor. so that according to their ability, I testify,  beyond their ability, willingly,
Cor. with much exhortation, begging of us the favor, even the fellowship of service for the sanctified.
Cor. And it was not as we expected,  first they gave themselves to the Lord and to us through the will of God,
Cor. for us to urge Titus that, as he earlier began this kindness, so he would even finish it for you also.
Cor. But as ye abound in everything, in faith,  word,  knowledge,  all diligence,  in your love to us, so that ye may also abound in this kindness.
Cor. I speak not from commandment,  because of the zeal of others, also examining the genuineness of your love.
Cor. For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that although he was rich he became poor for your sakes, so that by that man's poverty ye might become rich.
Cor. And in this I give judgment, for this is expedient for you who earlier began, from a year ago, not only the doing but also the intending.
Cor. And now also finish the doing, so that just as was the willingness of the intending, so also to finish from the having.
Cor. For if the willingness is present, it is acceptable to the extent if some man has, not to the extent he does not have.
Cor. For it is not so that ease is for others and stress for you,  out of parity your abundance at the present time is for the need of those men.
Cor. So that the abundance of those men may also happen for your need, so that there may become equity,
Cor. as it is written, he of much did not abound,  he of little did not lack.
Cor. But thanks to God who gives the same eagerness for you in the heart of Titus.
Cor. Because he indeed accepted the exhortation,  his own will being more zealous, he went forth to you.
Cor. And we sent along with him the brother whose praise in the good news is throughout all the congregations.
Cor. And not only so,  who was also chosen by the congregations, a traveling companion of us with this gift administered by us, for the glory of the same Lord and our willingness.
Cor. Arranging this lest any man may criticize us in this bounty administered by us,
Cor. providing things right, not only in the sight of the Lord,  also in the sight of men.
Cor. And we sent along with them our brother whom we often proved being diligent in many things,  is now much more diligent (with much confidence toward you)
Cor. whether on behalf of Titus my partner and co-workman for you, or our brothers, apostles of congregations, a glory of Christ.
Cor. Therefore show ye the proof of your love and our boast about you, for them in the face of the congregations.
Cor. For indeed it is superfluous for me to write to you about the service for the sanctified.
Cor. For I know your willingness, which I boast about you to the Macedonians, that Achaia was prepared from a year ago. And your zeal provoked the majority.
Cor. But I sent the brothers so that our boast about you would not be empty in this regard. So that, as I said, ye may be prepared,
Cor. if somehow Macedonians should come with me and find you unprepared, we (that we might not say, ye) would be embarrassed in this confidence of boast.
Cor. Therefore I thought it necessary to exhort the brothers that they would go ahead to you,  arrange in advance your gift that was earlier announced, for this to be ready this way as a gift and not as an exaction.
Cor. But this, he who sows sparingly will also reap sparingly,  he who sows in blessings will also reap in blessings.
Cor. Each man as he purposes in his heart, not from regret or from necessity, for God loves a cheerful giver.
Cor. And God is able to abound all grace for you, so that always in everything having all sufficiency, ye may abound for every good work,
Cor. as it is written, He has scattered abroad. He has given to the poor. His righteousness endures into the age.
Cor. And he who supplies seed to the man who sows,  bread for eating, may he supply and multiply your seed,  may he increase the fruits of your righteousness,
Cor. being enriched in everything for every generosity, which works gratitude to God through us.
Cor. Because the service of this ministry is not only supplying the needs of the sanctified,  also abounding through many thanksgivings to God
Cor. through the evidence of this service, glorifying God at the subjection of your confession toward the good news of the Christ,  at the generosity of the participation, for them and for all,
Cor. and by their supplication about you, yearning for you because of the transcending grace of God in you.
Cor. And thanks to God for his indescribable gift.
Cor. Now I Paul myself entreat you by the meekness and gentleness of Christ, who indeed am lowly in presence among you,  am bold toward you when absent.
Cor. But I pray not to be bold when present with the confidence by which I consider to be valiant toward some who consider us as walking according to flesh.
Cor. For though walking in flesh, we do not war according to flesh.
Cor. For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal,  mighty in God for the demolition of strongholds,
Cor. casting down imaginations,  every high thing exalted against the knowledge of God,  bringing every thought captive into the obedience of the Christ,
Cor. and having in readiness to avenge every disobedience, whenever your obedience is fulfilled.
Cor. Do ye look at things according to appearance. If any man has convinced himself to be of Christ, let him consider this again of himself, that, as he is of Christ, so also are we of Christ.
Cor. For even if I also should boast somewhat more abundantly about our authority (which the Lord gave us for building up and not for tearing you down), I will not be shamed,
Cor. so that I would not seem as if to terrify you by the letters.
Cor. Because, The letters, he says, are indeed weighty and powerful,  his bodily presence is weak,  his speech is disdained.
Cor. Let such a man think this, that such kind we are in word by letters when absent, we are also such kind when present in the work.
Cor. For we dare not classify or compare ourselves to some of those who commend themselves. But they, measuring themselves by themselves,  comparing themselves to themselves, do not understand.
Cor. But we will not boast in things immeasurable,  according to the measure of the standard that God apportioned to us, of a measure to reach even as far as you.
Cor. For it is not as not reaching for you. We overextend ourselves. For we even reached as far as you in the good news of the Christ,
Cor. not boasting in things immeasurable, in other men's labors,  having hope of your faith growing in you to be enlarged according to our measure for abundance,
Cor. in order to preach the good news beyond you, not to boast in another measure, in things prepared.
Cor. But he who boasts should boast in the Lord.
Cor. For he who commends himself, that man is not approved,  whom the Lord commends.
Cor. O that ye tolerated a little of my foolishness,  tolerate me too.
Cor. For I am jealous for you with a jealousy of God. For I betrothed you to one husband, a pure virgin to present to the Christ.
Cor. But I fear lest somehow, as the serpent enticed Eve by his craftiness, so your thoughts might be corrupted from the simplicity in the Christ.
Cor. For indeed if a man who comes, preaches another Jesus whom we did not preach, or ye receive another spirit that ye did not receive, or another good news that ye did not accept, ye well tolerated it.
Cor. For I reckon to come short in nothing of those, superlative apostles.
Cor. But even if I am unskilled in speech, yet not in knowledge,  in everything made known in all things to you.
Cor. Or did I commit a sin lowering myself so that ye might be lifted up, because I preached to you the good news of God freely?
Cor. I robbed other congregations, having taken a wage in order for your service.
Cor. And being present with you,  when needy, I was a burden to no man. For the brothers who came from Macedonia, they supplied my need. And in everything I kept and I will keep myself non-burdensome to you.
Cor. The truth of Christ is in me that this pride in me will not be stopped in the regions of Achaia.
Cor. Why? Because I do not love you? God knows.
Cor. But what I do, I also will do, so that I may cut off the opportunity of those who desire an opportunity, that in what they boast, they might appear just as we also.
Cor. For such men are false apostles, deceitful workmen, disguising themselves into apostles of Christ.
Cor. And no marvel, for even Satan disguises himself into an agent of light.
Cor. Therefore, it is no great thing if his helpers also disguise themselves as helpers of righteousness, whose end will be according to their works.
Cor. I say again, let not any man think me to be foolish,  if otherwise-even if as foolish-accept me, so that I also may boast some a little.
Cor. What I speak, I speak not according to the Lord,  as in foolishness, in this confidence of the boast.
Cor. Since many boast according to the flesh, I too will boast.
Cor. For being wise, ye gladly tolerate the foolish.
Cor. For ye tolerate it if some man enslaves you, if some man devours you, if some man seizes you, if some man lifts himself up, if some man strikes you on the face.
Cor. I speak as from shame, that we were so weak. Yet in whatever any man may be bold in foolishness, I say I too am bold.
Cor. Are they Hebrews? I too. Are they Israelites? I too. Are they a seed of Abraham? I too.
Cor. Are they helpers of Christ? (I speak as being mad) I more: in toils, more abundantly; in stripes, countless; in prisons, more frequently; in deaths often.
Cor. From the Jews five times I received forty save one.
Cor. Thrice I was beaten with rods, once I was stoned, thrice I was shipwrecked, I have done a night and a day in the depth,
Cor. in frequent journeys, in perils of flowing waters, in perils of bandits, in perils from my race, in perils from Gentiles, in perils in the city, in perils in the wilderness, in perils at sea, in perils among false brothers,
Cor. in toil and hardship, in frequent sleeplessness, in hunger and thirst, in frequent fasts, in cold and nakedness.
Cor. Besides the external things, crowding upon me daily is the care of all the congregations.
Cor. Who is weak,  I am not weak? Who is caused to stumble,  I am not made fiery?
Cor. If it is necessary to boast, I will boast of the things of my weakness.
Cor. The God and Father of the Lord Jesus Christ, he who is blessed into the ages, knows that I do not lie.
Cor. In Damascus the governor under Aretas the king guarded the city of the Damascenes wanting to apprehend me.
Cor. And I was lowered in a hamper through a window through the wall,  escaped his hands.
Cor. (Really, to me boasting is not helpful.) For I will come to visions and revelations of the Lord.
Cor. I know a man in Christ, fourteen years ago (whether in body, I know not, or whether outside the body, I know not, God knows) such a man was caught up as far as the third heaven.
Cor. And I know such a man (whether in body, or whether outside the body, I know not, God knows)
Cor. that he was caught up into the paradise,  heard inexpressible sayings that are not permitted for a man to utter.
Cor. For such a man I will boast,  for myself I will not boast, except in my weaknesses.
Cor. For if I should want to boast, I will not be foolish, for I will speak the truth. But I refrain lest any man should reckon to me above what he sees of me or hears anything from me.
Cor. And so that I might not be over exalted by the extraordinariness of the revelations, there was given to me a thorn in the flesh, an agent of Satan so that he would buffet me, so that I would not be over exalted.
Cor. I besought the Lord thrice about this, that it might depart from me.
Cor. And he said to me, My grace is sufficient for thee, for my power is made fully perfect in weakness. More gladly therefore I will boast in my weaknesses, so that the power of the Christ may reside in me.
Cor. Therefore I am pleased in weaknesses, in injuries, in necessities, in persecutions, in restrictions, for the sake of Christ. For when I am weak, then I am strong.
Cor. I have become foolish, boasting. Ye compelled me, for I ought to have been commended by you. For I came short in nothing of those, superlative apostles, even though I am nothing.
Cor. Indeed the signs of the apostle were performed among you in all perseverance, in signs and wonders and mighty works.
Cor. For what is there which ye were inferior to the other congregations? Except that I myself was not burdensome to you? Forgive me this wrong.
Cor. Behold, a third time I fare readily to come to you,  I will not be burdensome to you, for I seek not the things of you,  you. For the children ought not lay up for the parents,  the parents for the children.
Cor. And I most gladly will spend,  will be spent for your souls. Even though more earnestly loving you, the worse I am loved.
Cor. But let it be. I did not burden you. Nevertheless, being clever, I caught you with bait.
Cor. Any man of whom I have sent to you, did I exploit you through him?
Cor. I encouraged Titus,  I sent the brother with him. Did Titus exploit you in anything? Did we not walk in the same spirit, not in the same steps?
Cor. Again, do ye think that we are making defense to you? In the sight of God we speak in Christ. But all things, beloved, are for your edification.
Cor. For I fear lest somehow, having come, I may find you not such as I want,  I may be found by you such as ye do not want, lest somehow there be strifes, envyings, wraths, selfish ambitions, slanderings, whisperings, puffings up, turmoils,
Cor. lest having come again my God will make me low toward you,  I will bewail many of those who have sinned previously,  who did not repent from the trash and fornication and licentiousness that they committed.
Cor. This third time I am coming to you. In the mouth of two witnesses or three every saying will be confirmed.
Cor. I have told you before,  I say in advance, as present the second time,  now absent, I write to those who have previously sinned,  to all the others, that if I come to it again, I will not spare,
Cor. since ye seek proof of the Christ speaking in me, who is not weak toward you,  is mighty in you.
Cor. For even if he was crucified from weakness, yet he lives from the power of God. For we in him are also weak,  we will live with him from the power of God toward you.
Cor. Examine yourselves whether ye are in the faith. Test yourselves. Or know ye not yourselves, that Jesus Christ is in you? Unless ye are test-failing something.
Cor. But I hope that ye will know that we are not test-failing.
Cor. Now I pray to God, to do you nothing harmful, not that we would appear test-passing,  that ye would do right, even like we might be test-failing.
Cor. For we do not have any power against the truth,  for the truth.
Cor. For we are glad when we are weak and ye are strong. And this also we pray for, your full qualification.
Cor. Because of this I write these things while absent, so that I may not act harshly when present, according to the authority that the Lord gave me for building up and not for tearing down.
Cor. Finally brothers, farewell. Be thoroughly prepared, be encouraged, think the same way, live in peace,  the God of love and peace will be with you.
Cor. Salute each other by a holy kiss.
Cor. All the sanctified salute you.
Cor. The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ,  the love of God,  the fellowship of the Holy Spirit, is with all of you. Truly.
Galatians
Paul, an apostle (not from men, nor through man,  through Jesus Christ and God the Father who raised him from the dead),
all the brothers with me, to the congregations of Galatia:
Grace to you and peace from God the Father,  our Lord Jesus Christ
who gave himself for our sins, so that he might rescue us, according to the will of our God and Father, out of the evil age that has come,
to whom is the glory into the ages of the ages. Truly.
I marvel that ye are so soon removed from him who called you in the grace of Christ to another good news,
which is not another, except there are some who confuse you,  who want to pervert the good news of the Christ.
But even if we, or an agent from heaven, should preach a good news to you contrary to what we preached to you, let him be accursed.
As we have said before, I now also say again, if any man preaches a good news to you contrary to what ye received, let him be accursed.
For do I now trust men or God? Or do I seek to please men? For if I were still pleasing men I would not be a bondman of Christ.
For I make known to you, brothers, the good news that was preached by me, that it is not according to man.
For I neither received it from man, nor was I taught it,  it was through revelation of Jesus Christ.
For ye heard of my former behavior in Judaism, that I persecuted the church of God to extraordinariness,  ravaged it.
I advanced in Judaism beyond many contemporaries among my race, being a more extreme zealot of my paternal traditions.
But when it pleased God who separated me from my mother's belly,  called me through his grace,
to reveal his Son in me, so that I might preach him among the Gentiles, I did not straightaway confer with flesh and blood,
nor did I go up to Jerusalem to the apostles before me,  I went into Arabia and returned again to Damascus.
Then after three years I went up to Jerusalem to visit with Peter,  I remained with him fifteen days.
But I did not see another of the apostles except James the Lord's brother.
Now what I write to you, behold before God, I do not lie.
Later I came into the regions of Syria and Cilicia.
I was unknown by face to the congregations of Judea in Christ,
but they were only hearing that the man who once persecuted us now preaches the good news, the faith that he once ravaged.
they glorified God in me.
Then after fourteen years I went up again to Jerusalem with Barnabas, having taken along Titus also.
I went up according to revelation,  I declared to them the good news that I preach among the Gentiles,  privately to those who were of repute, lest somehow I might be running or ran in vain.
But not even Titus with me, being a Greek, was compelled to be circumcised.
But that issue was because of those false brothers smuggled in, who sneaked in to spy out our liberty that we have in Christ Jesus, so that they might enslave us,
to whom we yielded in subjection not even for an hour, so that the truth of the good news might continue with you.
But from those who were reputed to be something (what kind they were formerly, it makes no difference to me, God does not accept a personage of man), for those who were of repute added nothing to me,
but to the contrary, when they saw that I was entrusted with the good news for men of uncircumcision, as Peter for men of circumcision
for he who was working in Peter for the apostleship for men of circumcision was also working in me for the Gentiles),
James and Cephas and John, those who were reputed to be pillars, when they understood the grace that was given to me, they gave to me and Barnabas the right hands of fellowship. So that we were for the Gentiles,  they for men of circumcision,
only that we should remember the poor, which this same thing I also was eager to do.
But when Peter came to Antioch I opposed him to the face, because he was blameworthy.
For before certain men came from James he ate together with the Gentiles,  when they came, he withdrew and separated himself, fearing men of circumcision.
the other Jews also joined in hypocrisy with him, so that even Barnabas went along with their hypocrisy.
But when I saw that they did not walk uprightly toward the truth of the good news, I said to Peter before all, If thou being a Jew, live as a Gentile and not as a Jew, why do thou compel the Gentiles to live as Jews?
We are Jews by nature and not sinful men of the Gentiles,
knowing that a man is not made righteous from works of law, instead through faith of Jesus Christ. And we believed in Christ Jesus, so that we might be made righteous from faith of Christ,  not from works of law, because no flesh will be made righteous from works of law.
But if, while seeking to be made righteous in Christ, we ourselves were also found sinful, then is Christ an aide of sin? May it not happen!
For if I build again these things that I tore down, I demonstrate myself a transgressor.
For I, through law, died to law, so that I might live to God.
I have been crucified with Christ,  I no longer live,  Christ lives in me. And what I now live in flesh I live by the faith of the Son of God who loved me and gave himself up for me.
I do not disregard the grace of God, for if righteousness is through law, then Christ died in vain.
O foolish Galatians, who bewitched you not to obey the truth, before whose eyes Jesus Christ was earlier described among you, crucified?
I only want to learn this from you. Did ye receive the Spirit from works of law, or from a listening ear of faith?
Are ye so foolish, having begun in Spirit, are ye now made perfect by flesh?
Did ye suffer so many things in vain? If it is indeed in vain.
He therefore who supplies the Spirit to you and who works miracles among you, is it from works of law or from a listening ear of faith?
Just as Abraham believed God,  it was reckoned to him for righteousness.
Ye know therefore that those from faith, these are sons of Abraham.
the scripture having foreseen that God makes the Gentiles righteous from faith, proclaimed the good news in advance to Abraham: In thee all the nations will be blessed.
So then those from faith are blessed with the faithful Abraham.
For as many as are from works of law are under a curse, for it is written, Cursed is every man who does not continue in all things written in the book of the law, to do them.
But that no man is made righteous by law before God, is evident, because, The righteous man will live from faith.
the law is not from faith,  the man who does them will live in them.
Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law, having become a curse for us. For it is written, Cursed is every man who hangs on a tree.
So that the blessing of Abraham might occur for the Gentiles in Christ Jesus, so that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through the faith.
Brothers (I speak according to a man), in the same way of a man, no man annuls or adds to a contract that has been ratified.
Now the promises were spoken to Abraham and to his seed. He does not say, And to the seeds, as of many,  as of one, And to thy seed, who is Christ.
I say this, a covenant previously confirmed by God in Christ, the law, which happened four hundred and thirty years after, does not annul in order to make the promise useless.
For if the inheritance is from law, it is no longer from promise. But God has given it to Abraham through promise.
Why then the law? It was added on account of transgressions, until the seed would come to whom it was promised, which was arranged through agents in the hand of a mediator.
Now a mediator is not of one,  God is one.
Is the law therefore against the promises of God? May it not happen! For if a law was given that could make alive, truly righteousness would be from law.
But scripture confined all things under sin, so that the promise from faith in Jesus Christ might be given to those who believe.
But before faith came we were kept in custody under law, having been confined for faith that was going to be revealed.
So that the law became our schoolmaster for Christ, so that we might be made righteous from faith.
But faith having come, we are no longer under a schoolmaster.
For ye are all sons of God through faith in Christ Jesus.
For as many as were immersed into Christ have put on Christ.
There is no Jew nor Greek, there is no bondman nor freeman, there is no male and female, for ye are all one in Christ Jesus.
if ye are Christ's, then ye are Abraham's seed and heirs according to promise.
But I say the heir, for as long a time as he is a child, differs nothing from a bondman though he is lord of all.
Instead he is under stewards and managers until the time appointed from the father.
so when we were children, we were in bondage under the rudiments of the world.
But when the fullness of the time came, God sent forth his Son, born from a woman, born under law,
so that he might redeem those under law, so that we might receive the sonship.
because ye are sons, God sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father.
So that thou are no longer a bondman but a son,  if a son, then an heir through Christ.
But of course not knowing God then, ye were in bondage to those in nature who are not gods,
but now knowing God,  rather being known by God, how is it ye turn again to the weak and destitute elements to which ye desire again to be in bondage anew?
Ye observe days,  months,  times,  years.
I am afraid of you, lest somehow I have labored toward you in vain.
I beseech you, brothers, become like me, because I also am like ye. Ye wronged me in nothing.
But ye know that through a weakness of the flesh I preached the good news to you the first time.
ye did not disdain, nor did ye reject my trial in my flesh,  ye received me as an agent of God, as Christ Jesus.
Where then is your satisfaction? For I testify to you, that if possible, having plucked your eyes out, ye would have given them to me.
So then have I become your enemy telling you the truth?
They are zealous for you but not honorably. They want to exclude you, so that ye may be zealous for them.
But to be zealous of is always good in a good thing,  not only when I am present with you.
My little children, of whom I suffer birth pains again until Christ is formed in you.
But I was wishing to be present with you now and to change my tone, because I am perplexed at you.
Tell me those desiring to be under law, do ye not hear the law?
For it is written that Abraham had two sons, one from the servant girl,  one from the freewoman.
But in fact, the man from the servant girl was born according to flesh,  the man from the freewoman through promise.
Which things are allegorized, for these are two covenants, indeed one from mount Sinai giving birth for bondage, which is Hagar.
For Hagar is mount Sinai in Arabia,  it corresponds to the present Jerusalem,  is in bondage with her children.
But the Jerusalem above is free, which is mother of us all.
For it is written, Rejoice, thou barren woman not giving birth. Burst forth and shout, thou not suffering birth pains, because many more are the children of the desolate than of her who has the husband.
Now we, brothers, who correspond to Isaac, are children of promise.
But just as then, the man who was born according to flesh persecuted the man according to Spirit, so also now.
Nevertheless, what does the scripture say? Send away the servant girl and her son, for the son of the servant girl will, no, not inherit with the son of the freewoman.
So then, brothers, we are not children of a servant girl,  of the freewoman.
Stand firm therefore in the liberty in which Christ freed us,  be not entangled again in a yoke of bondage.
Behold, I Paul say to you, that if ye are circumcised, Christ will benefit you nothing.
I solemnly declare again to every man who is circumcised, that he is obligated to do the whole law.
Ye were discharged from the Christ, ye who are made righteous by law. Ye have fallen from grace.
For we through Spirit, from faith, wait for a hope of righteousness.
For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails anything nor uncircumcision,  faith working through love.
Ye were running well. Who hindered you, not to obey the truth?
This persuasion is not from him who calls you.
A little leaven leavens the whole lump.
I have confidence toward you in the Lord, that ye will think no other thing. But the man who troubles you will bear the verdict, whoever he may be.
But I, brothers, if I still preach circumcision, why am I still persecuted? Then the stumbling-block of the cross has been abolished.
O that those who trouble you would even cut it all off.
For ye, brothers, were called to liberty, only not liberty for an opportunity to the flesh,  be servants to each other through love.
For the whole law is fulfilled in one word, in this: Thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself.
But if ye bite and devour each other, watch out that ye be not consumed by each other.
But I say, walk in Spirit and ye will, no, not fulfill a lust of flesh.
For the flesh desires against the Spirit,  the Spirit is against the flesh. For these are hostile to each other, so that whatever these things are ye may want, ye may not do.
But if ye are led by Spirit ye are not under law.
Now the works of the flesh are apparent, which are, adultery, fornication, uncleanness, licentiousness,
idolatry, sorcery, hatreds, strifes, jealousies, wraths, selfish ambitions, dissensions, factions,
envyings, murders, intoxications, revelings,  things like these, of which I forewarn you, as I also did forewarn, that those who practice such things will not inherit the kingdom of God.
But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering, kindness, goodness, faithfulness,
meekness, self-control. Against such things there is no law.
those of the Christ have crucified the flesh with its passions and the lusts.
If we live in Spirit, we should also march in Spirit.
Let us not become conceited, provoking each other, envying each other.
brothers, if a man is overtaken in some transgression, ye the spiritual, restore such in a spirit of meekness, looking to thyself lest thou also be tempted.
Bear the burdens of each other,  so fulfill the law of the Christ.
For if some man presumes to be something when he is nothing, he deceives himself.
But let each man examine his own work,  then he will have the boast in himself alone and not in the other man.
For each man will bear his own burden.
But let him who is taught in the word share in all good things with him who teaches.
Be not misled, God is not mocked, for whatever a man sows this he will also reap.
Because he who sows to his own flesh will from the flesh reap corruption,  he who sows to the Spirit will from the Spirit reap eternal life.
let us not be weary doing good, for in our own time we will reap, not desponding.
So then as we have time, let us work what is good toward all men,  especially toward those belonging to a household of the faith.
See in how large letters I wrote to you with my hand.
As many as desire to make a good impression in flesh, these compel you to be circumcised, only so that they may not be persecuted for the cross of the Christ.
For not even those who have been circumcised themselves keep law,  they want you to be circumcised, so that they may boast in thy flesh.
But may it not be from me to boast except in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom the world has been crucified to me,  I to the world.
For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails anything nor uncircumcision,  a new creation.
as many as will march by this standard, peace upon them,  mercy,  upon the Israel of God.
Finally, let no man cause troubles for me, for I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ is with your spirit, brothers. Truly.
Ephesians
Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ through the will of God, to the sanctified who are at Ephesus,  faithful in Christ Jesus:
Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Blessed is the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenly things in Christ.
Just as he chose us in him before the foundation of the world, for us to be holy and unblemished before him in love.
Who predestined us for sonship through Jesus Christ for himself, according to the desire of his will,
for appreciation of the glory of his grace, by which he blessed us in him who is beloved.
In whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of transgressions, according to the wealth of his grace,
which he abounded for us in all wisdom and intelligence.
Having made known to us the mystery of his will according to his desire, which he purposed within himself
for an administration of the fullness of the times. To gather together all things in the Christ, things in the heavens and things upon the earth,
in him in whom also we obtained an inheritance. Having been predestined according to the purpose of him who works all things according to the deliberation of his will,
for us to be for appreciation of his glory, men who have first hoped in the Christ.
In whom ye also, having heard the word of the truth, the good news of your salvation, in whom also having believed, ye were sealed with the Holy Spirit of the promise,
which is a pledge of our inheritance, for the redemption of the acquired possession, for appreciation of his glory.
Because of this I also, having heard of your faith in the Lord Jesus,  love for all the sanctified,
I cease not expressing thanks for you, making remembrance of you in my prayers.
So that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give you a spirit of wisdom and revelation in knowledge of him,
having the eyes of your heart enlightened. For you to know what is the hope of his calling,  what is the wealth of the glory of his inheritance in the sanctified,
what is the transcending greatness of his power toward us who believe, according to the working of the dominion of his might,
which he wrought in the Christ, having raised him from the dead and seated at his right hand in the heavenly things,
far above every principle office,  position of authority,  power,  lordship,  every name that is named, not only in this age,  also in that which is coming.
he subordinated all things under his feet,  appointed him head over all things for the church,
which is his body, the fulfillment of him who fills all in all.
Even you, who were dead in trespasses and sins
in which ye once walked according to the era of this world, according to the ruler of the power of the air, the spirit that now works in the sons of disobedience.
Among whom we also all once behaved in the lusts of our flesh, doing the intentions of the flesh and of the thoughts,  were by nature children of wrath as also the others.
But God, being rich in mercy, through his great love that he loved us,
even us being dead in the transgressions, he made alive together with the Christ (ye are saved by grace),
raised us up together,  seated us together in the heavenly things in Christ Jesus.
So that in the coming ages he might show the transcending wealth of his grace in kindness toward us in Christ Jesus.
For ye are saved by grace through faith,  this a gift of God, not from you,
not from works, so that not any man may boast.
For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus for good works, which God preordained that we should walk in them.
Remember therefore that once ye, the Gentiles in flesh, who are called uncircumcision by that which is called circumcision (in flesh, made by hands),
that ye were at that time independent of Christ, alienated from the citizenship of Israel,  alien of the covenants of the promise, having no hope and godless in the world.
But now in Christ Jesus ye, being formerly far off, became near in the blood of the Christ.
For he is our peace, who made both one,  broke down the dividing wall of partition,
having abolished in his flesh the enmity-the law of the commandments in ordinances-so that he might create in himself the two into one new man, making peace,
might reconcile them both in one body to God through the cross, having slain the enmity by it.
after coming he preached good news, peace to you, to those far off and to those near,
because through him we both have the access in one Spirit to the Father.
So then ye are no more alien and foreign,  fellow citizens of the sanctified,  belonging to the household of God.
Which was built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Christ Jesus himself being the chief corner,
in whom the whole building joined together grows into a holy temple in the Lord,
in whom ye also are built together in Spirit into a habitation of God.
For this reason I Paul, the prisoner of Christ Jesus on behalf of you Gentiles,
since indeed ye heard of the administration of the grace of God, which was given to me for you,
that according to revelation he made known to me the mystery, as I wrote before in brief.
With which reading ye can recognize my understanding in the mystery of the Christ,
which in other generations was not made known to the sons of men, as it has now been revealed by Spirit to his holy apostles and prophets.
For Gentiles to be fellow-heirs,  of the same body,  fellow partakers of his promise in the Christ through the good news.
Of which I became a helper according to the gift of that grace of God, which was given to me according to the working of his power.
To me, a man less than the least of all the sanctified, this grace was given to preach good news among the Gentiles, the unsearchable wealth of Christ,
to make all men see what is the administration of the mystery hidden from the ages in God who created all things through Jesus Christ.
So that now the manifold wisdom of God might be made known to the principal offices and the positions of authority in the heavenly things, through the church,
according to the purpose of the ages, which he made in Christ Jesus our Lord,
in whom we have boldness and access in confidence through his faith.
Therefore I ask that ye not become discouraged at my tribulations on your behalf, which is your glory.
For this reason I bow my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
from whom every patriarchy in heavens and on earth is named.
So that he would grant you, according to the wealth of his glory, to be strengthened with power through his Spirit for the inner man,
for the Christ to dwell in your hearts through faith,
having been rooted and grounded in love, so that ye may be able to grasp with all the sanctified what is the breadth and length and depth and height,
to become aware of the love of the Christ, which transcends knowledge, so that ye may be filled in all the fullness of God.
Now to him who is able to do above extraordinary-above all things that we ask or think-according to the power that works in us,
to him is the glory in the church in Christ Jesus for all generations of the age of the ages. Truly.
I therefore, the prisoner in the Lord, call on you to walk worthily of the calling in which ye were called,
with all humility and meekness, with longsuffering, forbearing each other in love.
Endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace,
one body,  one Spirit. Just as also ye were called in one hope of your calling,
one Lord, one faith, one immersion,
one God and Father of all. He is over all,  through all,  in us all.
But the grace was given to each of us, according to the measure of the gift of the Christ.
Therefore he says, Having ascended on high, he led captivity captive,  gave gifts to men.
what is the ascended, except that he also first descended into the lower parts of the earth?
He who descended is also the same man who ascended high above all the heavens, so that he might fill all things.
indeed he gave the apostles,  the prophets,  the evangelists,  the shepherds and teachers
for the perfecting of the sanctified, for the work of ministry, for edification of the body of the Christ.
Until we all attain to the unity of the faith,  of the knowledge of the Son of God, to a perfect man, to a standard of stature of the fullness of the Christ.
So that we may no longer be childish, tossed about and carried about by every wind of doctrine by the trickery of men in craftiness with the methodology of error.
But being truthful in love, we may cause all things to grow for him who is the head-the Christ-
from whom the whole body, joined together and united together through every connection of the supply, according to the working of each one part within a standard, makes the growth of the body for the construction of itself by love.
This I say therefore,  solemnly declare in the Lord, for you to walk no longer as also the other Gentiles walk, in the vanity of their mind,
darkened in their understanding, alienated from the life of God through the ignorance that is in them, because of the callousness of their heart.
Who, having become callous, gave themselves over to licentiousness for the work of all uncleanness in greed.
But ye did not so learn the Christ,
if indeed ye heard him,  were taught in him, as truth is in Jesus,
for you to put off the old man according to your former conduct, the man who is corrupt according to the desires of deceitfulness,
to be renewed in the spirit of your mind,
to put on the new man according to God, the man who was created in righteousness and piety of the truth.
Therefore having put off falsehood, let each man speak truth with his neighbor, because we are body-parts of each other.
Be ye angry,  sin not. Let not the sun go down upon your wrath,
neither give a place to the devil.
Let the man who steals steal no more,  rather let him labor, working with his hands the good, so that he may have to give to him who has need.
Let no corrupt speech go out of your mouth, rather if there is any good word for edification of a need, so that it may give grace to those who hear.
do not grieve the Holy Spirit of God, in which ye are sealed for a day of redemption.
Let all bitterness,  wrath,  anger,  clamor,  reviling be taken away from you, with all evil.
become good toward each other, compassionate, forgiving each other, even as also God in Christ forgave us.
Become ye therefore imitators of God, as beloved children.
walk in love, as also the Christ loved us,  delivered himself up for us, an offering and a sacrifice to God for a fragrant aroma.
But fornication,  all uncleanness, or greed, shall not even be named among you as befits the sanctified,
also indecency,  foolish talking or jesting, things not befitting,  thankfulness instead.
For ye are men who know this, that no fornicator, or unclean man, or covetous man, who is an idolater, has any inheritance in the kingdom of the Christ and God.
Let no man deceive you by empty words, for because of these things the wrath of God comes upon the sons of disobedience.
Do not become ye therefore partakers with them.
For ye were once darkness,  now light in the Lord. Walk as children of light
for the fruit of the Spirit is in all goodness and righteousness and truth),
proving what is acceptable to the Lord.
do not associate with the unfruitful works of darkness,  instead even rebuke them.
For it is disgusting even to speak of the things happening by them secretly.
But all things exposed are revealed by the light, for everything that is seen is light.
Therefore he says, Awake, thou who sleep. And arise from the dead,  the Christ will shine upon thee.
Therefore watch carefully how ye walk, not as unwise but as wise,
redeeming the time, because the days are evil.
Because of this do not become foolish,  understanding what is the will of the Lord.
do not become intoxicated with wine, during which is debauchery,  be filled in Spirit,
speaking to yourselves in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing and striking strings in your heart to the Lord,
expressing thanks always for all things in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ to the God and Father,
submitting yourselves to each other in the fear of Christ.
Wives, submit to your own husbands as to the Lord.
Because a husband is head of the wife, as also Christ is head of the church,  himself the savior of the body.
But as the church is subject to the Christ, so also the wives to their own husbands in everything.
Husbands, love your own wives even as Christ also loved the church,  delivered himself up for it,
so that he might sanctify it, having cleansed it with the washing of water by the word,
so that he might present it to himself, the glorious church, not having spot or wrinkle or any such thing,  that it should be holy and unblemished.
So ought the husbands to love their own wives as their own bodies. He who loves his own wife loves himself.
For no man ever hated his own flesh,  nourishes and cherishes it, just as also Christ the church,
because we are parts of his body, of his flesh and of his bones.
Separate from this a man will leave his father and mother behind,  will be bonded with his wife,  the two will be in one flesh.
This mystery is great,  I speak for Christ and for the church.
Nevertheless ye also, each one in particular, shall so love his own wife as himself,  the wife that she fear her husband.
Children, obey your parents in the Lord, for this is right.
Honor thy father and mother, which is the first commandment with promise,
so that it may become well with thee,  thou will be long lasting on the earth.
ye fathers, do not exasperate your children,  rear them in the training and admonition of the Lord.
Bondmen, be obedient to the masters according to flesh, with fear and trembling, in simplicity of your heart as to the Christ.
Not according to eye-service, as men-pleasers,  as bondmen of Christ, doing the will of God from the soul,
bond-serving with goodwill, as to the Lord and not to men.
Knowing that whatever good thing each may do, he will receive this from the Lord, whether bondman or freeman.
ye masters, do the same things to them, easing up the threats, knowing also that the master of you yourselves is in the heavens,  there is no partiality from him.
Finally my brothers, be strong in the Lord and in the power of his might.
Put on the full armor of God to enable you to stand against the wiles of the devil.
Because our wrestling is not against flesh and blood,  against the principal offices, against the positions of authority, against the world-rulers of the darkness of this age, against the spiritual things of wickedness in the heavenly things.
Because of this take ye up the full armor of God, so that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day,  having done all, to stand.
Stand ye therefore having girded your loins with truth,  having put on the breastplate of righteousness,
having shod your feet in preparation of the good news of peace.
Above all having taken up the shield of faith, by which ye will be able to quench all the fiery darts of evil.
take the helmet of salvation,  the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God,
praying through every prayer and entreaty at every time in spirit,  being alert in this same thing in all perseverance and entreaty for all the sanctified,
for me, so that utterance may be given to me in boldness in opening my mouth to make known the mystery of the good news,
for which I am an ambassador in bondage, so that in it I may speak boldly, as I ought to speak.
But that ye also may know the things concerning me, what I do, Tychicus, the beloved brother and faithful helper in the Lord, will make known all things to you.
Whom I sent to you for this same thing, so that ye might know the things about us,  that he might encourage your hearts.
Peace to the brothers,  love with faith from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
The grace is with all those who love our Lord Jesus Christ with incorruptibility. Truly.
Philippians
Phil. Paul and Timothy, bondmen of Jesus Christ, to all the sanctified in Jesus Christ who are at Philippi, with the guardians and helpers:
Phil. Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Phil. I thank my God upon every memory of you,
Phil. always in my every entreaty for all of you, making the entreaty with joy
Phil. for your participation in the good news from the first day until now.
Phil. Being confident of this same thing, that he who began a good work in you will complete it until the day of Christ Jesus.
Phil. Just as it is right for me to think this about all of you, because I have you in my heart, both in my bonds and in the defense and confirmation of the good news, you all being partners with me of the grace.
Phil. For God is my witness, how I long for you all in bowels of Jesus Christ.
Phil. And this I pray, that your love may abound still more and more in knowledge and all discernment
Phil. for you to examine the things that are significant. So that ye may be tested by sunlight and not stumbling toward the day of Christ,
Phil. having been filled with fruits of righteousness, through Jesus Christ, for glory and praise of God.
Phil. But I want you to know, brothers, that the things in respect to me have come more for the advancement of the good news,
Phil. in order for my bonds in Christ to become apparent in the whole Praetorium,  in all the others.
Phil. And more of the brothers in the Lord have been convinced by my bonds to be much more bold to speak the word fearlessly.
Phil. Actually some even preach the Christ because of envy and strife,  some also because of good-will.
Phil. Some indeed proclaim the Christ from selfish ambition, not sincerely, supposing to bring affliction to my bonds.
Phil. But some from love, knowing that I am set for the defense of the good news.
Phil. What then? Except in every way, whether in pretence or in truth, Christ is proclaimed,  in this I rejoice,  also I will rejoice.
Phil. For I know that this will turn out to me for salvation (through your entreaty,  the support of the Spirit of Jesus Christ)
Phil. according to my eager expectation and hope that I will be shamed in nothing. But with all boldness, now as always, Christ will also be magnified in my body, whether through life or through death.
Phil. For to me to live is Christ,  to die is gain.
Phil. But if to live in flesh, this is fruit of labor to me, then what I will choose I know not.
Phil. And I am constrained by the two, having the desire to depart and be with Christ, being far better.
Phil. But to remain in the flesh is more necessary because of you.
Phil. And having been convinced of this, I know that I will remain,  will continue with you all for your progress and joy in the faith.
Phil. So that your pride may abound in Christ Jesus in me because of my presence with you again.
Phil. Only be citizens worthy of the good news of the Christ, so that, whether having come and having seen you or being absent, I may hear things about you that ye stand firm in one spirit, with one soul striving together for the faith of the good news.
Phil. And not being frightened in anything by those who oppose, which is indeed a sign of destruction to them,  to you of salvation,  this from God.
Phil. Because to you it was granted on behalf of Christ, not only to believe in him,  also to suffer for him,
Phil. having the same conflict such as ye saw in me,  now hear is in me.
Phil. If therefore any exhortation is in Christ, if any encouragement of love, if any fellowship of spirit, if any bowels and mercies,
Phil. fulfill my joy, that ye may think the same way, having the same love, being knit in soul, thinking in oneness,
Phil. in nothing according to selfish ambition or empty conceit,  in humility considering each other surpassing yourselves.
Phil. Look ye out each man not to things of yourselves,  each man also to the things of others.
Phil. Indeed have this way to think in you, that also was in Christ Jesus,
Phil. who, existing in the form of God, did not consider being equal to God something to seize and hold.
Phil. But he emptied himself, having taken a form of a bondman, having become in a likeness of men.
Phil. And having been found in a form like a man, he lowered himself, having become obedient until death, even of death from a cross.
Phil. Therefore God also highly exalted him and gave him the name above every name,
Phil. so that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of the heavenly,  the earthly,  the sub-earthly,
Phil. and that every tongue should acknowledge that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.
Phil. Therefore my beloved, just as ye have always obeyed, not only as in my presence,  now much more in my absence, work out your own salvation with fear and trembling.
Phil. For it is God who works in you both to desire and to work for approval.
Phil. Do all things without grumblings and arguments,
Phil. so that ye may become blameless and pure children of God, blameless in the midst of a crooked and perverted generation, among whom ye shine as lights in the world.
Phil. Holding firm the word of life, for a boast by me in the day of Christ, that I did not run in vain nor labor in vain.
Phil. Yet even if I am poured out a libation upon the sacrifice and service of your faith, I am glad and rejoice with you all.
Phil. And in the same way, ye also be glad and rejoice with me.
Phil. But I hope in the Lord Jesus to send Timothy to you soon, so that I also may be cheerful when I know the things about you.
Phil. For I have no man like-minded who will genuinely care for the things about you.
Phil. For they all seek the things of themselves, not the things of Christ Jesus.
Phil. But ye know the proof of him, that, as a child to a father, he served with me for the good news.
Phil. Indeed therefore I hope to send this man immediately, whenever I may focus on the things concerning me.
Phil. And I trust in the Lord that I myself also will come soon.
Phil. But I considered it necessary to send to you Epaphroditus, my brother and co-workman and fellow soldier,  your apostle and servant of my need,
Phil. since he was longing for you all,  distressed because ye heard that he was sick.
Phil. For also he was sick, near death,  God was merciful to him,  not only him,  also me, so that I might not have sorrow upon sorrow.
Phil. Therefore I sent him more urgently, so that having seen him again, ye may rejoice,  I may be less sorrowful.
Phil. Receive him therefore in the Lord with all gladness,  hold such men esteemed.
Phil. Because for sake of the work of the Christ he came near the point of death, handing over his life so that he might fill up the deficiency of your service toward me.
Phil. Finally, my brothers, rejoice in the Lord. To write the same things to you is really not irksome to me,  safe for you.
Phil. Beware of the dogs, beware of the evil workmen, beware of the excision.
Phil. For we are the circumcision, men who worship in spirit to God,  who boast in Christ Jesus,  not being confident in flesh.
Phil. Although (I having confidence also in flesh) if any other man seems to be confident in the flesh, I more:
Phil. in circumcision the eighth day, of the race of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, a Hebrew of Hebrews; regarding law, a Pharisee;
Phil. regarding zeal, persecuting the church; regarding the righteousness in law, having become blameless.
Phil. But whatever was gain to me, these things I regarded loss because of the Christ.
Phil. But indeed therefore I even consider all things to be loss because of things surpassing, of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, because of whom I suffered the loss of all things,  consider them to be rubbish, so that I may gain Christ,
Phil. and be found in him, not having my righteousness, that from law,  that through Christ's faith-the righteousness from God based on faith-
Phil. to know him,  the power of his resurrection,  the participation of his sufferings, being conformed to his death,
Phil. if somehow I might attain to the resurrection of the dead.
Phil. Not that I have already obtained or have already been fully perfected,  I press forward, if also I might seize upon that for which also I was seized by Christ Jesus.
Phil. Brothers, I reckon myself not to have seized,  one thing, indeed forgetting the things behind,  reaching forward to the things ahead,
Phil. I press forward toward the goal for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.
Phil. As many therefore as are perfect should think this way. And if ye think anything differently, this also God will reveal to you.
Phil. However in what we have attained, to march by the same standard, to think the same way.
Phil. Brothers, become fellow-imitators of me,  watch those who so walk, just as ye have us for an example.
Phil. For many walk, who (I told you often,  now also say while weeping) are enemies of the cross of Christ,
Phil. whose end is destruction, whose god is the belly,  the glory in their shame, who mind earthly things.
Phil. For our citizenship exists in the heavens, from which also we await a Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ,
Phil. who will transform the body of our lowliness, in order for it to become similar in form to the body of his glory, according to the working of his power even to subject all things to himself.
Phil. So then, my brothers, beloved and longed for, my joy and crown, so stand firm in the Lord this way beloved.
Phil. I exhort Euodias,  I exhort Syntyche, to think the same way in the Lord.
Phil. Yes, I ask thee also, genuine yokefellow, help them-the women who labored with me in the good news-with Clement also,  the rest of my co-workmen whose names are in the book of life.
Phil. Rejoice in the Lord always. Again I will say, rejoice.
Phil. Let your gentleness be known to all men. The Lord is near.
Phil. Be anxious about nothing,  in everything by prayer and supplication with thankfulness make your requests known to God.
Phil. And the peace of God that surpasses all understanding will guard your hearts and your minds in Christ Jesus.
Phil. Finally brothers, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honorable, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are commendable, if anything is a virtue,  if anything is praiseworthy, think on these things.
Phil. And what ye learned and received and heard and saw in me, these things do,  the God of peace will be with you.
Phil. But I rejoiced in the Lord greatly that now at last ye have revived thinking about me, in which also ye were thinking,  ye lacked opportunity.
Phil. Not that I speak regarding need, for I have learned in what things I am to be content.
Phil. I know both how to be abased and how to abound. In everything and in all things I have learned the secret both to be full and to be hungry, both to abound and to be lacking.
Phil. I can do all things in the Christ who strengthens me.
Phil. Nevertheless ye did well having shared with my affliction.
Phil. And ye Philippians also have seen that, in the beginning of the good news when I departed from Macedonia, not one congregation shared with me in the matter of giving and receiving except ye only,
Phil. because also in Thessalonica ye sent both once and again to my need.
Phil. Not that I seek the gift,  I seek the fruit that abounds to your account.
Phil. But I receive all things,  I abound. I have been filled, having received from Epaphroditus the things from you, an aroma of fragrance, an acceptable sacrifice well-pleasing to God.
Phil. And my God will fill your every need according to his wealth in glory in Christ Jesus.
Phil. Now to our God and Father is the glory into the ages of the ages. Truly.
Phil. Salute every sanctified man in Christ Jesus. The brothers with me salute you.
Phil. All the sanctified salute you,  especially those of the house of Caesar.
Phil. The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ is with you all. Truly.
Colossians
Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ through the will of God,  Timothy the brother,
to the holy and faithful brothers in Christ at Colossae: Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
We give thanks to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, always praying about you,
having heard of your faith in Christ Jesus,  the love toward all the sanctified,
because of the hope being reserved for you in the heavens, which ye heard before in the word of the truth of the good news
being present for you, just as also in all the world. And it is bearing fruit and increasing, just as also among you from the day that ye heard and recognized the grace of God in truth.
Just as also ye learned from Epaphras our beloved fellow bondman, who is a faithful helper of the Christ for you,
the man who also made clear to us your love in spirit.
Because of this we also, from the day that we heard, cease not praying for you and making request that ye may be filled with the knowledge of his will in all wisdom and spiritual understanding.
For you to walk worthily of the Lord for every desire to please, bearing fruit in every good work,  growing in the knowledge of God,
being strengthened in every ability, according to the dominion of his glory, for all perseverance and longsuffering with joy.
Giving thanks to the Father who made us qualified for the share of the portion of the sanctified in light.
Who rescued us out of the power of darkness,  transferred us into the kingdom of the Son of his love,
in whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins,
who is an image of the invisible God, the firstborn of all creation.
Because in him all things were created, things in the heavens and things upon the earth, things visible and things invisible, whether thrones or lordships or principal offices or positions of authority, all things have been created through him,  for him.
he is before all,  in him all things hold together.
he is the head of the body, the church, who is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead, so that he might become preeminent in all things.
Because in him it was considered good for all the fullness to dwell,
through him to reconcile all things to himself, having made peace through the blood of his cross, through him whether things upon the earth or things in the heavens.
you, being formerly alienated and hostile in mind, in works, in things evil. But now he has reconciled
in the body of his flesh through death, to present you holy and unblemished and unblameable before him.
If ye truly continue in the faith, founded,  steadfast,  not moved away from the hope of the good news that ye heard, which was proclaimed in all creation under heaven, of which I Paul became a helper.
I now rejoice in sufferings for you,  make complete in my flesh things lacking of the afflictions of the Christ for his body, which is the church.
Of which I became a helper according to the administration of God, which was given to me for you to fulfill the word of God,
the mystery that was hidden from the ages and from the generations,  has now been made known to his sanctified.
To whom God wanted to make known what is the wealth of the glory of this mystery among the Gentiles, which is Christ in you, the hope of glory.
Whom we proclaim, admonishing every man and teaching every man in all wisdom, so that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus.
For which also I labor, striving according to his working, which works in me with power.
For I want you to know how great a struggle I have about you,  those at Laodicea,  as many as have not seen my face in flesh.
So that their hearts may be encouraged, having been united together in love,  for all wealth of the full assurance of understanding, to knowledge of the mystery of the God and Father of the Christ.
In whom are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.
I say this so that not any man may delude you with persuasive speech.
For even though I am absent in the flesh, yet I am with you in the spirit, rejoicing and seeing your orderliness,  the steadfastness of your faith for Christ.
As therefore ye received Christ Jesus the Lord, walk in him,
rooted and built up in him and established in the faith, just as ye were taught, abounding in it with thankfulness.
Take heed lest there will be any man taking you captive through the love of wisdom and empty deceit, according to the tradition of men, according to the rudiments of the world,  not according to Christ.
Because in him all the fullness of the divinity dwells bodily.
ye are men who have been made full in him, who is the head of every principal office and position of authority.
In whom also ye were circumcised a circumcision not made with hands, in the removal of the body of the sins of the flesh by the circumcision of the Christ.
Having been buried with him in immersion, in which also ye were raised together through faith of the working of God, who raised him from the dead.
you, being dead in transgressions and the uncircumcision of your flesh, you he made alive together with him, having forgiven us all the transgressions,
having erased the handwriting against us in the regulations that were hostile to us,  he has taken it up from the midst, having nailed it to the cross.
Having stripped the principal offices and the positions of authority, he exposed them openly, having triumphed over them by it.
Let not any man therefore judge you in eating, or in drinking, or in the matter of a festival or a new moon or sabbaths,
which are a shadow of the things coming,  the body is Christ's.
Let no man umpire against you insisting on self-mortification,  worship of the agents, intruding in things that he has not seen, vainly puffed up by the mind of his flesh,
not holding to the head, from whom all the body, being supplied and held together through the connections and bonds, develops its growth from God.
If ye died with Christ from the rudiments of the world, why do ye submit to rules, as though living in the world?
Do not handle, nor taste, nor touch
which are all things for consumption by use), according to the commandments and teachings of men?
Which having, are indeed a matter of wisdom in will-worship,  self-mortification,  austerity of the body-not in any value against indulgence of the flesh.
If therefore ye were raised with the Christ, seek the things above, where Christ is, sitting at the right hand of God.
Think on the things above, not the things on the earth.
For ye died,  your life has been hidden with the Christ in God.
When the Christ, our life, is made known, then ye also will be made known with him in glory.
Put to death therefore your body-parts on the earth: fornication, uncleanness, passion, evil desire,  greed, which is idolatry.
Because of which the wrath of God comes upon the sons of disobedience,
in which ye also once walked when ye lived in them.
But now ye also, put off all these things: anger, wrath, wickedness, reviling, filthy speaking out of your mouth.
Do not lie to each other, having stripped off the old man with his practices,
having put on the new man, being renewed in knowledge according to an image of him who created him,
where there is no Greek and Jew, circumcision and uncircumcision, barbarian, Scythian, bondman, freeman,  the all and in all, Christ.
Put on therefore, as chosen men of God, holy and beloved, bowels of compassion, kindness, humility, meekness, longsuffering,
forbearing each other,  forgiving yourselves, if any man has a complaint against any, just as also the Christ forgave you, so also ye,
above all these things, love, which is the bond of perfection.
let the peace of God umpire in your hearts, for which also ye were called in one body,  become thankful.
Let the word of Christ dwell in you abundantly in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing yourselves in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing by grace in your hearts to God.
all things, anything whatever ye may do in word or in deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, expressing thanks to the God and Father through him.
Wives, be ye submissive to your own husbands as is proper in the Lord.
Husbands, love the wives and do not be made bitter against them.
Children, obey the parents in all things, for this is well-pleasing in the Lord.
Fathers, do not provoke your children, so that they may not be discouraged.
Bondmen, obey in all things those masters according to flesh, not in eye-service as men-pleasers,  in simplicity of heart, fearing God.
all things, anything whatever ye may do, work from soul as to the Lord and not to men,
knowing that from the Lord ye will receive the reward of the inheritance, for ye serve the Lord Christ.
he who does wrong will be recompensed what he did wrong,  there is no partiality.
Masters, present to the bondmen what is right and equitable, knowing that ye also have a Master in heavens.
Continue in prayer, being vigilant in it with thankfulness.
Praying simultaneously about us also, so that God may open to us a door of the word, to speak the mystery of the Christ, because of which I have also been bound,
so that I may make it known as I ought to speak.
Walk in wisdom toward those outside, redeeming the time,
your speech always with grace, seasoned with salt, to know how it is fitting for you to answer each one.
Tychicus will make known to you all things about me, the beloved brother and faithful helper and fellow bondman in the Lord.
Whom I sent to you for this same thing, so that he may know the things about you,  may encourage your hearts,
with Onesimus, the faithful and beloved brother who is of you. They will make known to you all things here.
Aristarchus my fellow prisoner salutes you,  Mark, the cousin of Barnabas (about whom ye received orders, if he comes to you, welcome him),
Jesus who is called Justus, these being the only fellow workmen from the circumcision for the kingdom of God, men who became a comfort to me.
Epaphras, the bondman of Christ from you, salutes you, always striving for you in prayers, so that ye may stand perfect and made full in all the will of God.
For I testify about him, that he has much zeal for you,  those in Laodicea,  those in Hierapolis.
Luke, the beloved physician,  Demas salute you.
Salute the brothers in Laodicea,  Nymphas,  the assembly associated with his house.
when the letter has been read among you, cause that it be read also in the congregation of Laodiceans,  that ye also read the one from Laodicea.
say to Archippus, Watch the ministry that thou received in the Lord so that thou may fulfill it.
The salutation of Paul by my hand. Remember my bonds. Grace is with you. Truly.
I Thessalonians
Thess. Paul and Silvanus and Timothy, to the congregation of Thessalonians in God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ: Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Thess. We thank God always about all of you, making recollection of you in our prayers,
Thess. remembering without ceasing your work of faith and labor of love and steadfastness of hope of our Lord Jesus Christ, before our God and Father.
Thess. Knowing, beloved brothers, your selection by God,
Thess. because the good news from us happened to you not in word only,  also in power,  in the Holy Spirit,  in much assurance, as ye know what kind of men we became among you, because of you.
Thess. And ye became imitators of us and of the Lord, having received the word in much affliction, with joy of the Holy Spirit,
Thess. in order for you to become examples to all those who believe, in Macedonia and in Achaia.
Thess. For the word of the Lord has sounded forth from you, not only in Macedonia and Achaia,  also in every place your faith toward God has gone forth, so that we have no need to say anything.
Thess. For they report about us what kind of entrance we had with you,  how ye turned to God from the idols to serve a living and true God,
Thess. and to await his Son from the heavens whom he raised from the dead-Jesus-who rescues us from the coming wrath.
Thess. For ye yourselves know, brothers, our entrance with you, that it has not become empty.
Thess. But having suffered before and been mistreated in Philippi, as ye know, we were bold in our God to speak to you the good news of God within much conflict.
Thess. For our exhortation is not from error, nor from uncleanness, nor in deception,
Thess. but as we have been approved by God to be entrusted with the good news, thus we speak, not as pleasing men,  God who proves our hearts.
Thess. For we came neither in word of flattery (at any time as ye know) nor a pretense of greed (God is witness)
Thess. nor seeking glory from men, neither from you nor from others. While able to bear down as apostles of Christ,
Thess. nevertheless we became gentle in the midst of you, as a nurse cherishes her own children.
Thess. Thus being desirous of you, we were pleased to impart to you, not only the good news of God,  also our own souls, because ye have become beloved to us.
Thess. For ye remember, brothers, our labor and the hardship. For, laboring night and day in order not to burden any of you, we preached to you the good news of God.
Thess. Ye are witnesses,  God, how piously and justly and blamelessly we became to you who believe,
Thess. just as ye know, as each one of you as a father of his own children, imploring you,  comforting,
Thess. and solemnly declaring for you to walk worthily of God, who calls you into his own kingdom and glory.
Thess. And because of this we thank God without ceasing, because, having received the word of God heard from us, ye received not the word of men,  as it truly is, the word of God, which also is at work in you who believe.
Thess. For ye, brothers, became imitators of the congregations of God, which are in Judea in Christ Jesus, because ye also suffered the same things by your own countrymen, just as also they by the Jews.
Thess. The men who both killed the Lord Jesus and their own prophets,  who persecuted us,  are not pleasing to God,  are contrary to all men.
Thess. Forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles so that they might be saved, in order to fill up their sins always. But wrath came upon them finally.
Thess. But we, brothers, who were orphaned from you for the time of an hour, in presence not in heart, hastened more earnestly to see your face, with much desire.
Thess. Therefore we wanted to come to you, indeed I, Paul, even once and again,  Satan hindered us.
Thess. For what is our hope or joy or crown of boast? Or is it not even ye, before our Lord Jesus at his coming?
Thess. For ye are our glory and joy.
Thess. Therefore, no longer covering over it, we preferred to be left behind in Athens alone.
Thess. And we sent Timothy, our brother,  a helper of God,  our fellow workman in the good news of the Christ, in order to establish you and to encourage you about your faith,
Thess. for no man to be disturbed by these afflictions. For ye yourselves know that we are set for this.
Thess. For also when we were with you we foretold you that we were going to be oppressed, just as it also happened,  ye know.
Thess. Because of this, I too, no longer covering over it, sent in order to know your faith, lest somehow he who tempts was tempting you,  our labor became in vain.
Thess. But now of Timothy, having come to us from you,  having proclaimed good news to us of your faith and love,  that ye always have a good recollection of us, longing to see us, just as we also you,
Thess. because of this, brothers, we were encouraged toward you in all our affliction and necessity through your faith.
Thess. Because now we live, if ye stand firm in the Lord.
Thess. For what thanks can we repay God about you, for all the joy in which we rejoiced because of you before our God,
Thess. praying night and day above extraordinary in order to see your face and to mend the deficiencies of your faith?
Thess. Now may our God and Father himself,  our Lord Jesus Christ, direct our way to you.
Thess. And may the Lord make you increase and abound in love toward each other,  toward all men, just as also we toward you,
Thess. in order to establish your hearts unblameable in holiness before our God and Father at the coming of our Lord Jesus with all his sanctified.
Thess. Finally therefore, brothers, we ask you,  summon in the Lord Jesus, that just as ye received from us how ye ought to walk and to please God, that ye may abound more.
Thess. For ye know what commandments we gave you through the Lord Jesus.
Thess. For this is the will of God, your sanctification, for you to abstain from fornication,
Thess. for each of you to know how to possess his own vessel in sanctification and reverence,
Thess. not in passion of lust, as also the Gentiles who have not known God,
Thess. not to transgress and to cheat his brother in the affair, because the Lord is vengeful about all these things, as also we forewarned you and solemnly testified.
Thess. For God did not call us to uncleanness,  in sanctification.
Thess. Therefore he who disregards, disregards not man,  God, who also gave his Holy Spirit to you.
Thess. But about brotherly love ye have no need to write to you, for ye yourselves are taught by God in order to love each other.
Thess. For ye are also doing it toward all the brothers in all Macedonia. But we exhort you, brothers, to abound more,
Thess. and to aspire to live quietly,  to do your own things,  to work with your own hands, just as we commanded you,
Thess. so that ye may walk properly toward those outside,  may have nothing lacking.
Thess. But we do not want you to be ignorant, brothers, about those who are asleep, so that ye may not grieve, as also the others who have no hope.
Thess. For if we believe that Jesus died and arose, so also those who became asleep through Jesus, God will bring with him.
Thess. For this we say to you in the word of the Lord, that we who are alive, who remain for the coming of the Lord, will no, not precede those who became asleep.
Thess. Because the Lord himself will descend from heaven with a shout, with a voice of the arch-agent,  with a trumpet of God. And the dead in Christ will rise first,
Thess. then we who are alive, who remain, will be caught up simultaneously with them in clouds to the Lord's gathering in the air. And so we will always be with the Lord.
Thess. Therefore encourage each other with these words.
Thess. But about the times and the seasons, brothers, ye have no need to be written to you.
Thess. For ye yourselves know accurately that the day of the Lord so comes as a thief in the night.
Thess. For when they say, Peace and safety, then sudden destruction approaches them, as the woman having birth pangs in her womb,  they will, no, not escape.
Thess. But ye, brothers, are not in darkness, so that the day would seize you as a thief.
Thess. Ye are all sons of light and sons of the day. We are not of the night nor of darkness.
Thess. So then let us not sleep, as also the others,  let us watch and be sober.
Thess. For those who sleep, sleep at night,  those who are intoxicated get drunk at night.
Thess. But we, being of the day, should be sober, putting on a breastplate of faith and love,  a helmet, the hope of salvation.
Thess. Because God appointed us not for wrath,  for an acquired possession of salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ, who died for us.
Thess. So that, whether we are awake or sleep, we should live together with him.
Thess. Therefore encourage each other,  build ye up one by one, just as ye also are doing.
Thess. And we ask you, brothers, to acknowledge those who labor among you,  who lead you in the Lord,  who admonish you,
Thess. and to esteem them with exceptional love because of their work. Live peaceably among yourselves.
Thess. And we encourage you, brothers, admonish the unruly, strengthen the weak-spirited, help the infirmed, be patient toward all.
Thess. See that not any man repays evil for evil to any man,  always pursue the good, both for each other and for all.
Thess. Rejoice always.
Thess. Pray without ceasing.
Thess. In everything express thanks, for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus for you.
Thess. Do not quench the Spirit.
Thess. Do not disdain prophecies,
Thess. but examine all things. Hold firm the good.
Thess. Abstain from all appearance of evil.
Thess. And may the God of peace himself sanctify you thoroughly. And may your spirit and soul and body be preserved complete, blamelessly at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Thess. Faithful is he who calls you, who also will do it.
Thess. Brothers, pray about us.
Thess. Salute all the brothers by a holy kiss.
Thess. I adjure you by the Lord that the letter be read to all the holy brothers.
Thess. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ is with you. Truly.
II Thessalonians
Thess. Paul and Silvanus and Timothy, to the congregation of Thessalonians in God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ:
Thess. Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Thess. We are indebted to thank God always about you, brothers, as it is fitting, because your faith is increasing greatly,  the love of each one of you all toward each other abounds.
Thess. So as for us ourselves to have pride in you in the congregations of God, for your perseverance and faith in all your persecutions and in the tribulations that ye endure,
Thess. being evidence of the righteous judgment of God, for you to be considered worthy of the kingdom of God, for which also ye suffer.
Thess. Since it is a righteous thing according to God to repay restriction to those who restrict you,
Thess. and relief with us, to you who are restricted, at the revealing of the Lord Jesus from heaven with his agents of power
Thess. in a fire of flame rendering vengeance to those who have not known God,  to those not obeying the good news of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Thess. Men who will suffer punishment, a penalty of eternal destruction from the presence of the Lord and from the glory of his might,
Thess. when he comes to be glorified in his sanctified,  to be marveled in that day by all those who believe (because our testimony among you was believed).
Thess. For which also we pray always about you, so that our God will make you worthy of the calling,  will fulfill every desire of goodness and work of faith with power.
Thess. So that the name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in you and ye in him, according to the grace of our God and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Thess. Now we ask you, brothers, on behalf of the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ and our gathering together to him,
Thess. for ye not to be quickly shaken from your mind, nor to be alarmed, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by a letter as by us, as that the day of the Christ has come.
Thess. Let not any man deceive you in any way, because if not, the defection may come first,  he may be revealed-the man of sin, the son of destruction,
Thess. who opposes and exalts himself against all that is called God or an object of worship, so as for him to sit in the temple of God, as God, displaying himself that he is God.
Thess. Do ye not remember that when I was yet with you I told you these things?
Thess. And now ye know that which restrains, for him to be revealed in his own time.
Thess. For the mystery of lawlessness is already working, only he who restrains it until now will develop from the midst.
Thess. And then the lawless will be revealed, whom the Lord will consume with the spirit of his mouth,  will neutralize at the appearance of his coming.
Thess. Whose coming is according to the working of Satan with all power and signs and marvels of deceit,
Thess. and in all deception of unrighteousness in those who are perishing, in return for which, they did not accept the love of the truth in order for them to be saved.
Thess. And because of this God will send them the force of a delusion, for them to believe a lie,
Thess. so that they might be condemned-all those who did not believe the truth,  who delighted in unrighteousness.
Thess. But we are indebted to express thanks to God always about you, brothers, beloved by the Lord, because God chose you from the beginning for salvation, in sanctification of spirit and belief of truth,
Thess. for which he called you, through our good news, for an acquired possession of glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Thess. So then, brothers, stand firm and hold to the traditions that ye were taught, whether by word or by letter from us.
Thess. And may our Lord Jesus Christ himself,  our God and Father who loved us and gave eternal encouragement and good hope through grace,
Thess. encourage your hearts and establish you in every good word and work.
Thess. Finally, brothers, pray about us, so that the word of the Lord may run and be glorified, just as also with you,
Thess. and that we may be delivered from aberrant and wicked men, for the faith is not of all men.
Thess. But the Lord is faithful, who will establish you and will keep you from evil.
Thess. And we are persuaded in the Lord toward you, that what we command you, ye both are doing and will do.
Thess. And may the Lord direct your hearts for the love of God,  for the steadfastness of the Christ.
Thess. Now we command you, brothers, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, for you to withdraw from every brother who walks disorderly and not according to the tradition, which they received from us.
Thess. For ye yourselves know how it is necessary to imitate us. Because we did not act disorderly among you,
Thess. nor did we eat bread gratis from any man,  in labor and toil, working night and day in order not to burden any of you.
Thess. Not because we have no right,  that we might give ourselves an example to you, in order to imitate us.
Thess. For even when we were with you we commanded you this, that if any man will not work, neither let him eat.
Thess. For we hear of some who walk among you disorderly, not working at all,  being busybodies.
Thess. Now to such men we command and exhort by our Lord Jesus Christ, that, working with quietness, they should eat their own bread.
Thess. But ye, brothers, do not become weary doing good.
Thess. And if any man does not obey our word by this letter, note that man,  do not associate with him, so that he may be ashamed.
Thess. And yet do not regard him as an enemy,  admonish him as a brother.
Thess. Now may the Lord of peace himself give you peace through everything in every way. The Lord is with all of you.
Thess. The salutation of Paul by my hand, which is a mark in every letter I write this way.
Thess. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ is with all of you. Truly.
I Timothy
Tim. Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ according to a commandment of God our Savior,  the Lord Jesus Christ our hope,
Tim. to Timothy, a genuine child in faith: Grace, mercy, peace, from God our Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.
Tim. As I urged thee, while going to Macedonia, remain in Ephesus, so that thou might command certain men not to teach something different,
Tim. nor to heed myths and endless genealogies, which cause controversies rather than stewardship of God in faith.
Tim. But the end of the commandment is love out of a pure heart,  a good conscience,  non-hypocritical faith.
Tim. From which some having swerved have turned aside to empty talk,
Tim. desiring to be law teachers, understanding neither what they say, nor about what they confidently assert.
Tim. But we know that the law is good, if any man uses it lawfully,
Tim. knowing this, that law is not laid down for righteous men,  for the lawless and rebellious, for the irreverent and sinful, for the impious and profane, for father killers and mother killers, for man killers,
Tim. for fornicators, for homosexuals, for kidnappers, for liars, for perjurers,  if there is any other thing contrary to the sound doctrine
Tim. according to the good news of the glory of the blessed God, of which I was entrusted.
Tim. And I have gratitude to the Christ-Jesus our Lord-who empowered me, because he considered me faithful, having placed in service
Tim. the man who was formerly blasphemous,  a persecutor,  an aggressor. But I obtained mercy because I did it being ignorant in unbelief.
Tim. And the grace of our Lord was filled to overflowing with the faith and love in Christ Jesus.
Tim. Faithful is the saying,  worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinful men, of whom I am foremost.
Tim. But because of this I obtained mercy, so that in me, the foremost, Jesus Christ might show forth all longsuffering for an example of those who were going to believe in him for eternal life.
Tim. Now to the King of the ages, immortal, invisible, alone wise, to God is honor and glory into the ages of the ages. Truly.
Tim. This command I set before thee, child Timothy, according to the prophecies leading the way for thee, so that by them thou might war the good warfare.
Tim. Holding faith and a good conscience, which some, having put away, made shipwreck about the faith,
Tim. of whom are Hymenaeus and Alexander, whom I delivered to Satan, so that they may be disciplined not to blaspheme.
Tim. I exhort therefore, first of all, that supplications, prayers, intercessions, thanksgivings, be made for all men,
Tim. for kings and all those who are in prominence, so that we may live a quiet and peaceful life in all piety and propriety.
Tim. For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior,
Tim. who wants all men to be saved and to come to knowledge of truth.
Tim. For there is one God,  one mediator of God and men, the man Jesus Christ,
Tim. who gave himself a ransom for all, the testimony for their own times.
Tim. For which I was appointed a herald and an apostle (I speak the truth in Christ, I do not lie), a teacher of Gentiles in faith and truth.
Tim. I desire therefore the men to pray in every place, lifting up devout hands, apart from anger and argument.
Tim. And similarly, the women to adorn themselves in disciplined decorum, with reverence and sobriety, not with braided hair or gold or pearls or expensive apparel,
Tim. but (which is fitting for women professing godliness) through good works.
Tim. Let a woman learn in silence in all subjection.
Tim. But I do not allow a woman to teach, nor to have authority of a man,  to be in quietness.
Tim. For Adam was first formed, then Eve.
Tim. And Adam was not deceived,  the woman, having been deceived, became in transgression.
Tim. But she will be saved through childbearing, if they continue in faith and love and sanctification with sobriety.
Tim. Faithful is the saying, If any man aspires to supervision, he desires a good work.
Tim. The overseer therefore must be blameless, the husband of one wife, sober, serious minded, disciplined, loving strangers, able to teach,
Tim. no drunkard, not a fighter, not greedy of base gain,  gentle, noncontentious, no lover of money,
Tim. a man who rules his own house well, having children in subjection with all propriety
Tim. (but if any man knows not how to rule his own house, how will he take care of a congregation of God?),
Tim. not a new convert, lest having been puffed up he may fall into the condemnation of the devil.
Tim. And he must also have good testimony from those outside, lest he may fall into reproach and the snare of the devil.
Tim. Helpers likewise, be honorable, not double-tongued, not attending to much wine, not greedy of base gain,
Tim. holding the mystery of the faith in a pure conscience.
Tim. And let these also first be proven, then being blameless, let them serve.
Tim. The wives likewise, be honorable, not slanderous, sober, faithful in all things.
Tim. Let helpers be husbands of one wife, ruling children and their own houses well.
Tim. For those who serve well will acquire to themselves a good standing,  much boldness in the faith in Christ Jesus.
Tim. These things I write to thee, hoping to come to thee sooner,
Tim. but if I delay, that thou may know how it is necessary to live in a house of God, which is a congregation of the living God, the pillar and foundation of the truth.
Tim. And without controversy great is the mystery of piety. God was manifested in flesh, justified in spirit, seen by agents, proclaimed among nations, believed in the world, taken up in glory.
Tim. But the Spirit says expressly that in latter times some will depart from the faith, giving heed to deceitful spirits and doctrines of demons,
Tim. speaking lies in hypocrisy, their own conscience having been seared with a hot iron,
Tim. forbidding to marry, to abstain from foods, which God created for partaking with thankfulness by those who believe and know the truth.
Tim. Because every creation of God is good,  nothing rejected that is received with thankfulness,
Tim. for it is sanctified through the word of God and prayer.
Tim. Laying these things down to the brothers, thou will be a good helper of Jesus Christ, reared up in the words of the faith,  of the good doctrine that thou have followed.
Tim. But reject the profane and old wives' fables,  exercise thyself to piety.
Tim. For bodily exercise is profitable for a little,  piety is profitable for all things, having promise of the present life,  of that which is coming.
Tim. Faithful is the saying,  worthy of all acceptance.
Tim. For we both labor and are reproached for this, because we have hoped in the living God, who is the Savior of all men, especially of the faithful.
Tim. These things command and teach.
Tim. Let no man disparage thy youth,  become an example of the faithful, in word, in conduct, in love, in spirit, in faith, in purity.
Tim. Until I come, give attention to reading, to exhortation, to teaching.
Tim. Do not neglect the gift in thee, which was given thee by prophecy with the laying on of the hands of the eldership.
Tim. Think on these things-exist within these things-so that thy progress may be visible among all.
Tim. Hold firm to thyself and to the doctrine. Continue in them, for in doing this thou will save both thyself and those who hear thee.
Tim. Do not rebuke an elder man,  entreat him as a father, younger men as brothers,
Tim. elder women as mothers, younger women as sisters, in all purity.
Tim. Support widows, the real widows.
Tim. But if any widow has children or grandchildren, let them first learn to be devoted to their own house,  to give back recompense to their parents, for this is acceptable in the sight of God.
Tim. But the real widow,  made alone, has hoped in God,  continues in entreaties and prayers night and day.
Tim. But she who is self-indulgent is dead while she lives.
Tim. And command these things, so that they may be blameless.
Tim. But if any man does not provide for his own,  especially those belonging his household, he has denied the faith,  is worse than an infidel.
Tim. Let no widow be enrolled under sixty years old, having become the wife of one man,
Tim. being testified in good works: if she has reared children, if she has been hospitable to strangers, if she has washed the feet of the sanctified, if she has relieved those who are afflicted, if she has followed every good work.
Tim. But refuse younger widows, for when they are sexually aroused, they desire of the Christ to marry,
Tim. which has condemnation because they have disregarded the original pledge.
Tim. And also at the same time they learn to be idle, roving the houses,  not only idle,  also babbling and meddlesome, speaking things that they ought not.
Tim. I desire therefore the younger women to marry, to bear children, to manage house, to give not one occasion to him who opposes on account of slander.
Tim. For some have already turned aside after Satan.
Tim. If any believing man or believing woman has widows, let them relieve them,  let not the congregation be burdened, so that it may relieve the real widows.
Tim. Let the elders who rule well be regarded worthy of double compensation, especially those who labor in the word and in teaching.
Tim. For the scripture says thou shall not muzzle an ox that is threshing. And the workman is worthy of his wage.
Tim. Accept no accusation against an elder, except at two or three witnesses.
Tim. Those who sin, rebuke in the sight of all, so that the others may also have fear.
Tim. I solemnly testify before God,  the Lord Jesus Christ,  the chosen agents, that thou keep these things without prejudice, doing nothing from partiality.
Tim. Lay hands hastily on no man, nor contribute to other sins. Keep thyself pure.
Tim. No longer drink water,  use a little wine because of thy stomach and thy frequent weaknesses.
Tim. The sins of some men are evident, leading to judgment,  also for some they follow after.
Tim. Likewise also good works are evident,  those faring otherwise cannot be hid.
Tim. Let bondmen, as many as are under a yoke, regard their own masters worthy of all respect, so that the name of God and the doctrine may not be blasphemed.
Tim. And those who have believing masters, let them not disparage them because they are brothers, instead let them serve more because they are believers and beloved-those who are recipients of the benefit. Teach and exhort these things.
Tim. If any man teaches something different,  does not associate with wholesome words, those of our Lord Jesus Christ,  to the doctrine according to piety,
Tim. he is puffed up, understanding nothing,  doting about disputes and word controversies, from which develop envy, strife, revilings, evil surmisings,
Tim. constant frictions of men corrupted in mind,  destitute of the truth, supposing piety to be a means of gain. Withdraw from such.
Tim. But piety with contentment is great gain,
Tim. for we brought nothing into the world. It is clear that neither can we carry anything out,
Tim. but having food and covering we will be content with these.
Tim. But those who want to be rich fall into a temptation and a snare and many foolish and harmful lusts, which sink men in destruction and ruin.
Tim. For the love of money is a root of all the evils, of which some aspiring have wandered from the faith,  have pierced themselves through with many sorrows.
Tim. But thou, O man of God, flee these things,  pursue righteousness, piety, faith, love, patience, meekness.
Tim. Fight the good fight of the faith. Take hold of the eternal life for which thou are called,  confessed the good confession in the sight of many witnesses.
Tim. I command thee in the sight of God, who makes all live,  of Christ Jesus, who testified to Pontius Pilate the good confession,
Tim. that thou keep the commandment, without spot, blameless, until the appearance of our Lord Jesus Christ,
Tim. which he will show in his own times, the blessed and only Potentate, the King of those who are kings,  Lord of those who are lords,
Tim. who alone has immortality, dwelling in irreproachable light, whom no man has seen, nor can see, to whom is honor and eternal dominion. Truly.
Tim. Command the rich in the present age not to be arrogant, nor hope in the uncertainty of wealth,  in the living God, who supplies us all things abundantly for enjoyment,
Tim. to do good, to be rich in good works, to be generous, willing to share,
Tim. storing up for themselves a good foundation for that which is coming, so that they may take hold of the eternal life.
Tim. O Timothy, keep the entrustment, avoiding the profane babblings and objections of the falsely-called knowledge,
Tim. which some men professing have missed the mark concerning the faith. Grace is with thee. Truly.
II Timothy
Tim. Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ through the will of God, according to the promise of the life in Christ Jesus,
Tim. to Timothy, a beloved child: Grace, mercy, peace, from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.
Tim. I have gratitude to God whom I serve from the forefathers in a pure conscience, as I have unceasing remembrance about thee in my supplications, night and day
Tim. longing to see thee, having remembered thy tears, so that I may be filled with joy,
Tim. taking memory of the non-hypocritical faith in thee, which first dwelt in thy grandmother Lois,  thy mother Eunice,  I am persuaded that is in thee also.
Tim. Because of which reason I remind thee to rekindle the gift of God that is in thee through the laying on of my hands.
Tim. For God did not give us a spirit of cowardice,  of power,  of love,  of soberness.
Tim. Be not ashamed therefore of the testimony of our Lord nor of me his prisoner,  suffer together with the good news according to the power of God.
Tim. Who saved us and who called us with a holy calling, not according to our works,  according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus before times eternal.
Tim. But which has now been manifested by the appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ, who indeed abolished death,  brought life and immortality to light through the good news,
Tim. for which I was appointed a herald,  an apostle,  a teacher of Gentiles.
Tim. Because of which reason I also suffer these things. But I am not ashamed, for I know him whom I have believed,  I am persuaded that he is able to preserve my consignment for that day.
Tim. Hold the pattern of sound words that thou heard from me, in faith and love in Christ Jesus.
Tim. Guard the good consignment through the Holy Spirit that dwells in us.
Tim. This thou know, that all those in Asia turned away from me, of whom are Phygellus and Hermogenes.
Tim. May the Lord grant mercy to the house of Onesiphorus, because he often refreshed me and was not ashamed of my chain.
Tim. But when he happened to be in Rome he sought me more diligently and found me
Tim. (may the Lord grant him to find mercy from the Lord in that day),  in how many things he ministered at Ephesus, thou know very well.
Tim. Thou therefore, my child, be strong in the grace in Christ Jesus.
Tim. And what thou have heard from me through many witnesses, these things commit thou to faithful men who will be competent to teach others also.
Tim. Thou therefore endure hardship as a good soldier of Jesus Christ.
Tim. No man who serves in the military entangles himself in the affairs of life, so that he may please the man who enlisted the army.
Tim. And also if any man competes, he is not crowned unless he competes lawfully.
Tim. The farmer who labors must be the first to partake of the fruits.
Tim. Consider what I say, for may the Lord give thee understanding in all things.
Tim. Remember Jesus Christ, raised from the dead, of the seed of David, according to my good news,
Tim. within which I suffer evil to the point of bonds as an evildoer,  the word of God is not bound.
Tim. Because of this I endure all things because of the chosen, so that they also may experience salvation in Christ Jesus, with eternal glory.
Tim. Faithful is the saying, For if we die together, we will also live together.
Tim. If we endure, we will also reign together. If we renounce him, that man will also renounce us.
Tim. If we are unfaithful, that man remains faithful. He cannot renounce himself.
Tim. Remind them of these things, solemnly testifying in the sight of the Lord, not to brawl verbally, to nothing useful, to the ruin of those who hear.
Tim. Be diligent to present thyself approved to God, an irreproachable workman, correctly traversing the word of truth.
Tim. But shun profane babblings, for they will advance to greater impiety,
Tim. and their word will have a feeding field like gangrene, of whom are Hymenaeus and Philetus,
Tim. men who missed the mark about the truth, saying the resurrection happened already,  they overthrow the faith of some.
Tim. Nevertheless the firm foundation of God stands, having this seal, The Lord knows those who are his, , Let every man who names the name of the Lord keep away from unrighteousness.
Tim. Now in a great house there are not only gold and silver vessels,  also wood and earthen,  some for esteem and some for disesteem.
Tim. If therefore any man purges himself from these things, he will be a vessel for esteem, sanctified and useful to the master, prepared for every good work.
Tim. And flee juvenile impulses,  pursue righteousness, faith, love, peace, with those who call upon the Lord out of a pure heart.
Tim. But shun foolish and uneducated questions, knowing that they breed quarrels.
Tim. And a bondman of the Lord must not quarrel,  be gentle to all, able to teach, patient,
Tim. in meekness correcting those who oppose. Perhaps God may grant them repentance for recognition of the truth,
Tim. and they may sober up out of the snare of the devil, having been captured by him for his will.
Tim. But know this, that in the last days perilous times will come.
Tim. For men will be lovers of self, lovers of money, boasters, arrogant, blasphemous, disobedient to parents, ungrateful, impious,
Tim. devoid of natural affection, irreconcilable, slanderous, without self-control, savage, no lovers of good,
Tim. traitors, reckless, beclouded, lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God,
Tim. having a form of piety,  repudiating the power of it. Now turn away from these men,
Tim. for from these are those who creep into houses,  take captive petty women laden with sins, being led away by various impulses,
Tim. ever learning and never able to come to knowledge of truth.
Tim. And by which way Jannes and Jambres opposed Moses, so also do these oppose the truth. Men corrupted in mind, worthless about the faith.
Tim. But they will not advance in much more, for their folly will be evident to all men, as also that of those men came to be.
Tim. But thou have closely followed my doctrine, conduct, purpose, faith, longsuffering, love, perseverance,
Tim. persecutions, sufferings, such as happened to me at Antioch, at Iconium, at Lystra. I endured such persecutions,  the Lord rescued me out of them all.
Tim. And also all those who want to live devoutly in Christ Jesus will be persecuted.
Tim. But evil men and impostors will go forward to worse, leading astray and being led astray.
Tim. But continue thou in what thou learned and were convinced of, knowing from whom thou learned them.
Tim. And that from a babe thou have known the sacred writings, which are able to make thee wise for salvation through faith in Christ Jesus.
Tim. Every scripture is inspired by God and useful for instruction, for reproof, for correction, for discipline in righteousness,
Tim. so that the man of God may be qualified, having been completed for every good work.
Tim. I solemnly testify therefore before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, who is going to judge the living and the dead at his appearing and his kingdom,
Tim. preach the word, stand ready in season, out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all longsuffering and teaching.
Tim. For there will be time when they will not tolerate sound doctrine,  they will accumulate teachers to themselves according to their own desires, who tickle the ear,
Tim. and will indeed turn the ear away from the truth,  will be turned aside to myths.
Tim. But be thou sober in all things, endure afflictions, do the work of an evangelist, bring thy ministry to fullness.
Tim. For I am already poured out a libation,  the time of my dissolution is imminent.
Tim. I have fought the good fight, I have finished the course, I have kept the faith.
Tim. Henceforth there is laid up for me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, will award to me in that day,  not to me only,  also to all those who have loved his appearing.
Tim. Hurry to come to me quickly,
Tim. for Demas forsook me having loved the present age,  he went to Thessalonica, Crescens to Galatia, Titus to Dalmatia.
Tim. Only Luke is with me. Having taken Mark, bring him with thee, for he is useful to me for service.
Tim. But Tychicus I sent to Ephesus.
Tim. Bring the cloak that I left behind at Troas with Carpus when thou come,  the books, especially the parchments.
Tim. Alexander the coppersmith did many evil things to me. May the Lord repay him according to his works,
Tim. of whom thou also beware, for he extremely opposed our words.
Tim. At my first defense no man came with me,  all forsook me. May it not be reckoned to them.
Tim. But the Lord stood by me and strengthened me, so that through me the sacred message might be brought to fullness,  all the Gentiles might hear. And I was rescued out of the mouth of the lion.
Tim. And the Lord will rescue me from every evil work,  will save me for his heavenly kingdom, to whom is the glory into the ages of the ages. Truly.
Tim. Salute Prisca and Aquila,  the house of Onesiphorus.
Tim. Erastus remained at Corinth,  Trophimus I left being sick at Miletus.
Tim. Hurry to come before winter. Eubulus salutes thee,  Pudens,  Linus,  Claudia,  all the brothers.
Tim. The Lord Jesus Christ is with thy spirit. Grace is with you. Truly.
Titus
Titus. Paul, a bondman of God and an apostle of Jesus Christ, according to the faith of the chosen of God,  the knowledge of truth according to piety,
Titus. in hope of eternal life, which the non-lying God promised before times eternal,
Titus. but in his own times he made known his word by preaching, which I was entrusted according to the commandment of God our Savior,
Titus. to Titus, a genuine child according to the common faith: Grace, mercy, peace from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ our Savior.
Titus. I left thee behind in Crete on account of this: That thou should set in order the things lacking,  appoint elders in every city as I commanded thee,
Titus. if any man is blameless, the husband of one wife, having believing children, not with an accusation of debauchery or insubordinate.
Titus. For the overseer must be blameless as a steward of God, not self-willed, not prone to anger, not a drunkard, not a fighter, not greedy of base gain,
Titus. but a lover of strangers, a lover of good, serious minded, just, devout, self-controlled,
Titus. holding firm the faithful word according to the teaching, so that he may also be able to exhort by the sound doctrine,  to correct those who contradict.
Titus. For there are also many insubordinate men, vain talkers and deceivers, especially those from circumcision,
Titus. who must be muzzled, men who subvert whole houses, teaching things that they ought not, for sake of ugly profit.
Titus. A certain man of themselves, a prophet of their own, said, Cretans are always liars, evil beasts, lazy bellies.
Titus. This testimony is true, because of which reason, reprove them harshly, so that they may be sound in the faith,
Titus. not giving heed to Jewish myths,  commandments of men who turn away from the truth.
Titus. Truly to the pure all things are pure,  to those who are defiled and unbelieving nothing is pure,  both their mind and their conscience are defiled.
Titus. They profess to know God,  in their works they deny him, being abominable,  disobedient,  worthless for every good work.
Titus. But speak thou the things that are fitting for the sound doctrine.
Titus. Aged men are to be sober, noble, serious minded, sound in faith, in love, in perseverance.
Titus. Aged women likewise be reverent in behavior, not slanderous, not enslaved to much wine, teachers of what is good,
Titus. so that they may admonish the young women to be sensible, to love their husbands, to love their children,
Titus. to be serious-minded, pure, homemakers, good, submissive to their own husbands, so that the word of God may not be blasphemed.
Titus. Likewise exhort the younger men to be sober-minded.
Titus. Concerning all things presenting thyself a pattern of good works in the doctrine: incorruption, dignity, incorruptibility,
Titus. sound speech, irreproachable, so that the man of opposition may be ashamed, having nothing bad to say about us.
Titus. Bondmen are to be obedient to their own masters, to be well-pleasing in all things, not speaking contrary,
Titus. not pilfering,  demonstrating all good fidelity, so that they may adorn the doctrine of God our Savior in all things.
Titus. For the saving grace of God has appeared to all men,
Titus. disciplining us, so that, having denied irreverence and worldly lusts, we should live soberly and righteously and piously in the present age.
Titus. Awaiting the blessed hope and appearance of the glory of our great God and Savior Jesus Christ,
Titus. who gave himself for us, so that he might redeem us from all lawlessness,  purify to himself a special people, a zealot of good works.
Titus. These things speak and exhort and rebuke with every command. Let no man disregard thee.
Titus. Remind them to be submissive to principle offices and positions of authority, to be obedient, to be prepared for every good work,
Titus. to slander no man, to be noncontentious, gentle, showing all meekness to all men.
Titus. For we also were formerly foolish, disobedient, being led astray, serving various lusts and pleasures, living in evil and envy, hateful, hating each other.
Titus. But when the kindness and philanthropy of God our Savior appeared,
Titus. he saved us, not of works in righteousness that we did,  according to his mercy through the washing of regeneration and renewing of the Holy Spirit,
Titus. which he poured out upon us abundantly, through Jesus Christ our Savior.
Titus. So that, having been made righteous by the grace of that man, we may become heirs according to the hope of eternal life.
Titus. Faithful is the saying. And I want thee to strongly insist about these things, so that those who have believed in God may be careful to manage good works. These things are good and beneficial to men.
Titus. But avoid foolish questionings,  genealogies,  contentions,  legalistic fightings, for they are useless and vain.
Titus. Shun a factious man after a first and second admonition,
Titus. knowing that such a man is perverted,  sins, being self-condemned.
Titus. When I will send Artemas to thee, or Tychicus, be diligence to come to me in Nicopolis, for I have decided to winter there.
Titus. Help Zenas the lawyer and Apollos on their way diligently, so that nothing may be lacking for them.
Titus. And also let our men learn to be in the lead of good works for the essential needs, so that they may not be unfruitful.
Titus. All those with me salute thee. Salute those who love us in faith. Grace is with all of you. Truly.
Philemon
Phlm. Paul, a prisoner of Christ Jesus,  Timothy the brother, to Philemon our beloved and co-workman,
Phlm. and to the beloved Apphia,  Archippus our fellow soldier,  to the congregation at thy house:
Phlm. Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Phlm. I thank my God, making recollection of thee always in my prayers,
Phlm. hearing of thy love and faith, which thou have toward the Lord Jesus and for all the sanctified,
Phlm. so that the fellowship of thy faith may become potent (in the knowledge of every good thing in us) for Christ Jesus.
Phlm. For we have much joy and encouragement in thy love, because the bowels of the sanctified have been refreshed by thee, brother.
Phlm. Therefore, though I have much boldness in Christ to command thee that which is befitting,
Phlm. because of love I rather beseech, being such as aged Paul,  now also a prisoner of Jesus Christ.
Phlm. I beseech thee for my child Onesimus, whom I begot in my bonds.
Phlm. A man formerly unprofitable to thee,  now is profitable to thee and to me, whom I sent back.
Phlm. And thou should welcome him, that is, my bowels.
Phlm. Whom I wanted to keep back for myself, so that in thy behalf he might serve me in the bonds of the good news.
Phlm. But I wanted to do nothing without thy mind, so that thy goodness might not be as from obligation,  from volition.
Phlm. For perhaps because of this he departed for an hour, so that thou might receive him back forever,
Phlm. no longer as a bondman,  above a bondman, a beloved brother, especially to me,  how much more to thee, both in flesh and in the Lord.
Phlm. If then thou have me a partner, accept him as myself.
Phlm. But if he has wronged thee, or owes anything, charge this to me.
Phlm. I Paul write with my hand, I will repay, so that I may not say to thee that thou owe me in return even thyself.
Phlm. Yes, brother, let me have a favor of thee in the Lord. Refresh my bowels in the Lord.
Phlm. Being confident in thine obedience I wrote to thee, knowing that thou will do above what I say.
Phlm. But simultaneously also prepare a lodging for me, for I hope that by your prayers I will be granted to you.
Phlm. Epaphras, my fellow prisoner in Christ Jesus, salutes thee,
Phlm. and Mark, Aristarchus, Demas, Luke, my co-workmen.
Phlm. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ is with your spirit. Truly.
Hebrews
God, who formerly spoke in many portions and in many ways to the fathers by the prophets, spoke to us in these last days by a Son,
whom he appointed heir of all things, through whom also he made the ages.
Who, being the radiance of his glory,  the exact image of his essence,  upholding all things by the word of his power, having made purification of our sins through himself, he sat down at the right hand of the Majesty in the heights.
Having become so much better than the agents, as he has inherited a more excellent name than they.
For to which of the agents did he ever say, Thou are my Son, today I have begotten thee? And again, I will be to him for a Father,  he will be to me for a Son?
again when he brings the firstborn into the world he says, And let all the agents of God worship him.
indeed toward the agents he says, He who makes his agents spirits,  his ministers a flame of fire.
But toward the Son, Thy throne, O God, is into the age of the age. The scepter of thy kingdom is a scepter of straightness.
Thou have loved righteousness and hated lawlessness. Because of this, God, thy God, anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy companions.
thou, Lord, at the beginnings founded the earth,  the heavens are the works of thy hands.
They will perish,  thou are permanent. And they will all become old as a garment.
thou will roll them up as a mantle,  they will be changed. But thou are the same,  thy years will not cease.
But to which of the agents has he ever said, Sit thou by my right hand until I place thine enemies a footstool of thy feet?
Are they not all ministering spirits sent forth for service for the sake of those who are going to inherit salvation?
Because of this we ought to give more earnest heed to the things that were heard, lest we might slip away.
For if the word spoken through agents became certain,  every transgression and disobedience received a just recompense of reward,
how will we escape, having neglected so great a salvation? Which first, having taken to be spoken by the Lord, was verified for us by those who heard;
God also testifying simultaneously by signs and wonders,  by various powers and distributions of the Holy Spirit according to his will.
For he did not subject the coming world to agents, about which we speak.
But a certain man has somewhere testified, saying, What is man, that thou remember him? Or a son of man, that thou help him?
Thou made him a little something less than the agents. Thou crowned him with glory and honor.
Thou subordinated all things under his feet. For in subordinating all things to him, he left nothing not subordinate to him. But now we do not yet see all things subordinated to him.
But we see Jesus who has been made a little something less than the agents, who, because of the suffering of death, has been crowned with glory and honor, so that by the grace of God he would taste of death for every man.
For it was fitting for him, through whom are all things,  because of whom are all things, having brought many sons to glory, to make the pathfinder of their salvation fully perfect through sufferings.
For both he who sanctifies and those being sanctified are all of one, because of which reason he is not ashamed to call them brothers,
saying, I will declare thy name to my brothers. In the midst of the congregation I will sing praise to thee.
again, I will be a man who has trusted in him. And again, Behold, I and the children that God has given me.
Since therefore the children have partaken of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise shared the same things, so that through death he might make him who has the power of death impotent, that is, the devil.
he might liberate these, as many as throughout all their lifetime were deserving of bondage, with a specter of death.
For he certainly did not embrace agents,  he embraced the seed of Abraham.
Therefore he was obligated to be made like his brothers in accordance with all things, so that he might become a merciful and faithful high priest in things toward God, in order to make reconciliation for the sins of the people.
For in that he himself has suffered, having been tempted, he is able to help those being tempted.
Because of which, holy brothers, companions of a heavenly calling, consider the Apostle and High Priest of our affirmation, Jesus Christ,
who was faithful to him who appointed him, as also was Moses in all his house.
For this man was considered worthy of more glory than Moses, by so much as he who built it has more esteem than the house.
For every house is built by some man,  he who built all things is God.
Moses was indeed faithful in all his house as a servant, for a testimony of the things that were going to be spoken,
but Christ as a Son over his house, whose house we are, if only we keep in possession our confidence and pride of hope, firm until the end.
Therefore, as the Holy Spirit says, Today if ye hear his voice,
do not harden your hearts as in the rebellion, according to the day of the trial in the wilderness,
where your fathers challenged me, tested me,  saw my works forty years.
Therefore I was angry with that generation,  said, They are always led astray in their heart,  they did not know my ways.
So I swore in my wrath, They will not enter into my rest.
Watch, brothers, lest there will be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief in withdrawing from the living God.
But exhort each other during each day, while it is called Today, lest any of you may be hardened by the deceitfulness of sin.
For we have become companions of the Christ, if only we keep in possession the primacy of the essence, steadfast until the end,
while it is said, Today if ye will hear his voice, do not harden your hearts as in the rebellion.
For some who heard rebelled,  not all those who came out of Egypt by Moses.
But with whom was he angry forty years? Was it not with those who sinned, whose carcasses fell in the wilderness?
to whom did he swear were not going to enter into his rest, if not to those who were disobedient?
we see that they were not able to enter in because of unbelief.
Let us be afraid therefore, lest, a promise being left behind to enter into his rest, any of you should seem to have come short.
For we also are having good news preached, just as also those men,  the word of hearing did not benefit those men, not having been mixed together with faith in those who heard.
For those who believe enter into that rest, just as he said, So I swore in my wrath, They will not enter into my rest, although the works occurred from the foundation of the world.
For he spoke somewhere about the seventh this way, And God rested during the seventh day from all his works,
in this again, They will not enter into my rest.
Since therefore it remains for some to enter into it,  those who formerly had good news did not enter because of disobedience,
again he appoints a certain day, Today, saying in David after so long a time (as it is said), Today if ye will hear his voice, do not harden your hearts.
For if Joshua had given them rest, he would not have spoken about another day after these things.
There remains therefore a sabbath for the people of God.
For a man who has entered into his rest, he has also rested from his works, as God did from his own.
Let us therefore be diligent to enter into that rest, so that not any man may fall by the same example of disobedience.
For the word of God is living,  potent,  sharper, above every two-edged sword,  piercing as far as the division both of soul and spirit, of both joints and marrow,  discernible of the thoughts and intentions of the heart.
there is no creature concealed from his presence,  all things are naked and vulnerable to his eyes, before whom is the word to us.
Having therefore a great high priest who has passed through the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us take hold of the affirmation.
For we do not have a high priest who is unable to sympathize with our weaknesses,  who was tempted in all things in the same way, without sin.
Let us therefore come near with boldness to the throne of grace, so that we may take mercy,  may find grace for timely help.
For every high priest taken from men is appointed for men in things toward God, so that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins.
Who can be gentle to those who are ignorant and led astray, since he himself is also encompassed with weakness.
because of this he is obligated, as for the people, so also for himself, to offer for sins.
not any man takes the honor to himself,  being called by God, just as also Aaron.
So also Christ did not glorify himself to become a high priest,  it was he who said to him, Thou are my Son, today I have begotten thee.
And just as he says in another, Thou are a priest into the age according to the order of Melchizedek.)
Who, in the days of his flesh, having offered up both prayers and supplications with strong shouting and tears to him who was able to save him from death,  who was heard because of his reverence,
although being a Son, he learned obedience from the things that he suffered.
having been fully perfected, he became the source of eternal salvation to all those who obey him,
having been designated by God a high priest according to the order of Melchizedek.
About whom, much subject matter from us is also difficult to explain, since ye have become sluggish in hearing.
For also men who ought to be teachers because of the time, ye have need again for some man to teach you the rudiments of the beginning of the oracles of God,  have become men who have need of milk,  not of solid food.
For every man partaking of milk is unskilled in the word of righteousness, for he is childlike.
But solid food is for mature men, those having their sensibilities trained through practice for the discernment of both good and evil.
Therefore having left the word of the primacy of Christ, let us be brought forward to perfection, not again laying a foundation of repentance from dead works,  of faith toward God,
of doctrine of washings,  of laying on of hands,  of resurrection of the dead,  of eternal judgment.
this we will do, if of course God will permit.
For it is impossible for those who were once enlightened,  who tasted of the heavenly gift,  who became partakers of the Holy Spirit,
who tasted the good word of God and the powers of the coming age,
who fell away, to restore again to repentance, crucifying to themselves the Son of God,  disgracing him publicly.
For the soil that has drunk the rain often coming upon it,  bringing forth vegetation useful for those by whom also it is cultivated, partakes of a blessing from God.
But producing thorns and thistles it is unfit and near a curse, the end of which is for burning.
But we are persuaded better things about you, beloved,  things that have salvation, even though we speak this way.
For God is not unrighteous to forget your work,  the labor of love that ye showed toward his name, having served the sanctified,  who are serving.
we earnestly desire each of you to show the same diligence toward the full assurance of the hope until the end,
so that ye may not become lazy,  imitators of those who, through faith and longsuffering, inherit the promises.
For God who promised to Abraham, since he had none greater to swear by, swore by himself,
saying, Surely indeed, blessing I will bless thee,  multiplying I will multiply thee.
this way, having patiently endured, he obtained the promise.
For men certainly swear by the greater,  of every dispute with them the oath is final for confirmation.
By which God, wanting to demonstrate more abundantly to the heirs of the promise the immutableness of his resolve, confirmed it by an oath.
So that by two immutable events, in which it is impossible for God to lie, we may have strong encouragement, having fled for refuge to seize the hope being openly displayed.
Which we have as an anchor of the soul, both sure and steadfast,  that enters into the interior of the veil,
where the forerunner, Jesus, entered for us, having become a high priest into the age according to the order of Melchizedek.
For this Melchizedek, king of Salem, priest of God Most High, having met Abraham returning from the slaughter of the kings, also blessed him.
To whom also Abraham divided a tenth of all. Being actually translated, first, king of righteousness,  then also, king of Salem, which is king of peace,
without father, without mother, without genealogy, having neither beginning of days nor end of life,  having been made like the Son of God, remains a priest continually.
notice how great this man was, to whom also the patriarch Abraham gave a tenth out of the best spoils.
Now indeed those of the sons of Levi who receive the priesthood have commandment to collect tithes from the people according to the law, that is, of their brothers, although having come out of the loins of Abraham.
But the man who did not descend from them has received tithes from Abraham,  has blessed the man having the promises.
without all contradiction the inferior is blessed by the superior.
here indeed, men who die receive tithes,  there, he who is testified about that he lives.
And, so to speak, Levi also, the man who receives tithes, has paid tithes through Abraham,
for he was still in the loins of his father when Melchizedek met him.
If indeed therefore perfection was through the Levitical priesthood (for under it the people had received the law), what further need is there for another priest to arise according to the order of Melchizedek,  not be designated according to the order of Aaron?
For the priesthood being changed, of necessity a change of law also occurs.
For he of whom these things are spoken pertains to another tribe, from which no man has attended to the altar.
For it is evident that our Lord arose out of Judah, regarding which tribe Moses spoke nothing about the priesthood.
it is still far more evident, if according to the likeness of Melchizedek, there arises another priest,
who has become, not according to a law of a carnal commandment,  according to the power of an indestructible life.
For he testifies, Thou are a priest into the age according to the order of Melchizedek.
For indeed there becomes an annulment of a preceding commandment because of its weakness and uselessness
for the law made nothing fully perfect),  an introduction of a better hope, through which we approach God.
inasmuch as it is not without an oath. For actually those who become priests are so without an oath,
but he with an oath, because of him who says to him, The Lord swore and will not change his mind, Thou are a priest into the age according to the order of Melchizedek.
By so much, Jesus has become the surety of a better covenant.
of course those who have become priests are more, because of being prevented to continue by death,
but he, because of his remaining into the age, has the priesthood unchangeable.
Whereupon he is able also to save to the uttermost those who come to God through him, being always alive in order to intercede on their behalf.
For such a high priest is fitting for us, devout, innocent, undefiled, separated from sinners,  having become higher than the heavens.
Who has no need to offer up sacrifices each day, as those high priests, first for his own sins, then for those of the people, for this he did, once, when he offered up himself.
For the law appoints men high priests who have weakness,  the word of the oath after the law, a Son who has been fully perfected into the age.
Now a summation about the things being spoken is, we have such a high priest who was seated at the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens,
a minister of the holy things,  of the true tabernacle, which the Lord erected and not man.
For every high priest is appointed in order to offer both gifts and sacrifices, whereupon it is necessary for this man also to have something that he may offer.
For certainly if he were on earth, he would not even be a priest, there being the priests who offer the gifts according to the law,
who serve for an example and shadow of the heavenly things. Just as Moses who was divinely warned while going to complete the tabernacle, for he says, See thou make all things according to the pattern that was shown thee on the mountain.
But now he has obtained a superior ministry, by so much as he is also the mediator of a superior covenant, which has been enacted upon superior promises.
For if that first one was faultless, no place would have been sought for a second.
For, finding fault with them, he says, Behold, the days come, says the Lord,  I will perfect a new covenant with the house of Israel and with the house of Judah.
Not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers in the day when I took them by my hand to lead them out of the land of Egypt. Because they did not continue in my covenant,  I disregarded them, says the Lord.
Because this is the covenant that I will ordain with the house of Israel after those days, says the Lord, giving my laws into their mind,  I will write them on their hearts. And I will be to them for a God,  they will be to me for a people.
they will, no, not teach each man his fellow citizen,  each man his brother, saying, Know the Lord, because all will know me, from their small as far as their great.
Because I will be merciful to their iniquities,  their sins and their lawlessness I will no, not further remember.
In saying, New, he has made the first old. And what is becoming old and obsolete is near disappearance.
Now indeed therefore the first had ordinances of divine service and the earthly sanctuary.
For a tabernacle was prepared, the first in which was also the lampstand,  the table,  the presentation of the loaves, which is called the Holy place.
behind the second curtain, the tabernacle called the Holy of holies,
having a golden censer,  the ark of the covenant overlaid entirely in gold, in which was a golden pot holding the manna,  Aaron's rod that budded,  the tablets of the covenant.
above it were cherubim of glory overshadowing the place of forgiveness, about which things it is not now to speak in detail.
these things thus having been prepared, the priests indeed enter into the first part of the tabernacle continually, accomplishing the services.
But into the second part, the high priest alone, once a year, not without blood, which he offers for himself and for the unintentional sins of the people,
this signifying from the Holy Spirit, the way into the holy things is not yet to be made known while the first tabernacle still remains.
Which is a figure for the present time, according to which both gifts and sacrifices are offered that are not able to make the man officiating fully perfect in respect to conscience,
only in foods and drinks and various washings: carnal ordinances imposed until a time of reformation.
But Christ, having arrived a high priest of the good things that are coming, through the greater and more perfect tabernacle not made with hands, that is, not of this creation,
not through the blood of goats and calves,  through his own blood, he entered in once into the Holy things, having found eternal redemption.
For if the blood of bulls and goats,  the ashes of a heifer, sprinkling those who were defiled, sanctifies for the purification of the flesh,
how much more the blood of Christ, who, through the eternal Spirit, offered himself unblemished to God, will cleanse your conscience from dead works in order to serve a living God?
because of this he is mediator of a new covenant, so that a death having occurred for the redemption of the transgressions against the first covenant, those who are called might take the promise of the eternal inheritance.
For where a covenant is, a necessity is to present the death of the man who made the covenant.
For a covenant is effective with the dead, since it is never enforced while the man who made the covenant lives.
Whereupon neither has the first been dedicated without blood.
For of every commandment according to law that was spoken by Moses to all the people, after taking the blood of the calves and goats, with water and scarlet wool and hyssop, he sprinkled both the book itself and all the people,
saying, This is the blood of the covenant that God made for you.
likewise he sprinkled with the blood both the tabernacle and all the vessels of the service.
almost all things, according to the law, are cleansed with blood,  remission does not occur without bloodshed.
Indeed therefore, a necessity was for the models of the things in the heavens themselves to be cleansed with these,  the heavenly things with better sacrifices than these.
For the Christ entered not into a holy place made with hands, representative of the true,  into heaven itself, now to appear in the presence of God for us.
not so that he might offer himself often, as the high priest enters into the Holy things each year with blood by another,
since it would be necessary for him to suffer often, from the foundation of the world. But now once, at the end of the ages, he was made known for an annulment of sin by the sacrifice of himself.
inasmuch as it is reserved to men once to die,  after this, judgment,
so also the Christ, having been offered once in order to take up the sins of many, will appear a second time, independent of sin, to those waiting for him for salvation.
For the law having a shadow of the good things that are coming, not the same substance of the events, with the same sacrifices that are offered continually each year, they are never able to fully perfect those who are approaching.
Otherwise would they not have ceased being offered, because of those who worship, once having been cleansed, to have no further conscience of sins?
But in them is a reminder of sins each year.
For it is impossible for the blood of bulls and goats to take away sins.
Therefore when he comes into the world, he says, Sacrifice and offering thou did not desire,  thou prepared for me a body.
In whole burnt offerings,  for sin thou were not pleased.
Then I said, Lo, I come (in the volume of a book it is written about me) to do thy will, O God,
saying above, Sacrifice and offering and whole burnt offerings and for sin thou did not desire, nor were thou pleased with things that are offered according to the law.
Then he said, Lo, I come to do thy will, O God. He takes away the first, so that he may establish the second.
By which will we are sanctified through the one time offering of the body of Jesus Christ.
indeed every priest stands daily serving and offering the same sacrifices often, which can never take away sins.
But this man, having offered one sacrifice on behalf of sins forever, sat down at the right hand of God,
waiting henceforth until his enemies are placed a footstool of his feet.
For by one offering he has fully perfected forever those being sanctified.
the Holy Spirit also testifies to us, after indeed foretelling,
This is the covenant that I will ordain with them after those days, says the Lord, giving my laws on their hearts,  on their minds I will write them,
and, Their sins and their lawlessness I will, no, not further remember.
Now where there is remission of these, there is no more offering for sin.
Having therefore, brothers, boldness for entrance into the holy things by the blood of Jesus,
which he inaugurated for us, a new and living way through the curtain, that is, his flesh,
a great priest over the house of God,
let us approach with a true heart in full assurance of faith, our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience,  our body washed in pure water.
Let us hold firm the affirmation of the hope unwavering, for he who promised is faithful.
let us examine each other for provocation of love and good works.
Not forsaking the assembling together of ourselves, as is the habit of some,  exhorting,  so much the more as long as ye see the day approaching.
For when we sin willfully after taking the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more a sacrifice for sins,
but a certain fearful expectation of judgment and of fire, a fervor that is going to devour the opposition.
Any man who has disregarded the law of Moses dies without mercies from two or three witnesses.
By how much worse punishment do ye think he will deserve who has trampled the Son of God,  who considered profane the blood of the covenant by which he was sanctified,  who treated the Spirit of grace contemptuously?
For we know him who said, Vengeance is for me, I will repay, says the Lord. And again, The Lord will judge his people.
It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.
But remember the former days, in which, after being enlightened, ye endured a great contest of sufferings,
partly made a spectacle, both by reviling and afflictions,  partly having become companions of those so treated.
For ye were both compassionate about my bonds,  ye accepted with joy the plundering of your possessions, knowing yourselves to have a superior and an enduring existence in the heavens.
Therefore do not throw off your boldness, which has great recompense of reward.
For ye have need of perseverance, so that, having done the will of God, ye may receive the promise.
For yet a very little while, he who is coming will come,  will not delay.
But the righteous man will live from faith,  if he should withdraw, my soul is not pleased with him.
But we are not of retreat for destruction,  of faith for the preservation of the soul.
Now faith is the foundation of hoping, the evidence of events not being seen.
For by this the ancients were well reported.
By faith we understand the ages to have been prepared by the word of God. For the things that are seen do not come to be from that which is visible.
By faith Abel offered to God a better sacrifice than Cain, because of which he was reported to be righteous, God testifying about his gifts,  through it, he who died still speaks.
By faith Enoch was transferred to not see death,  he was not found, because God transferred him. For before his removal he was reported to be pleasing to God.
apart from faith it is impossible to please him. For he who comes to God must believe that he is,  becomes a rewarder of those who search for him.
By faith Noah, being divinely warned about things not yet seen, moved with awe, prepared an ark for the salvation of his house, through which he condemned the world,  became an heir of righteousness according to faith.
By faith Abraham, when called, obeyed to go out to the place that he was going to take for an inheritance. And he went out, not knowing where he was going.
By faith he lived alien in the land of promise as a foreigner, having dwelt in tents with Isaac and Jacob, the fellow heirs of the same promise.
For he anticipated the city that has the foundations, whose builder and architect is God.
By faith even Sarah herself received power for conception of seed,  she gave birth beyond the time of age, because she considered him faithful who promised.
therefore from one man,  these things having become deadened, were begotten as the stars of the heaven for multitude,  as the sand of the seashore, countless.
All these died in faith, not having taken the promises,  who saw and greeted them from afar,  who confessed that they were foreigners and sojourners on the earth.
For those who say such things show that they are seeking a fatherland.
if indeed they remembered that from which they came out, they would have had time to return.
But now they aspire for a superior one, that is, a heavenly one. Therefore God is not ashamed of them, to be called their God, for he has prepared for them a city.
By faith Abraham, being tested, offered Isaac. And he who received the promises offered his only begotten son,
about whom it was said, The seed by thee will be called in Isaac.
Having reckoned that God is able to raise up even from the dead, from where also, in a figure, he did receive him back.
By faith Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau about things coming.
By faith Jacob, while dying, blessed each of the sons of Joseph,  bowed in worship upon the top of his staff.
By faith Joseph, while perishing, remembered about the exodus of the sons of Israel,  commanded about his bones.
By faith Moses, after being born, was hid three months by his parents, because they saw the child well-formed,  they were not afraid of the king's edict.
By faith Moses, having become great, refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter,
having chosen rather to be mistreated with the people of God, than to have the pleasure of sin temporarily.
Having esteemed the vilification of the Christ greater wealth than the treasures of Egypt, for he focused toward the recompense of reward.
By faith he forsook Egypt, not having feared the wrath of the king, for he persevered as seeing the invisible.
By faith he performed the Passover and the sprinkling of the blood, so that he who was destroying the firstborn would not touch them.
By faith they passed through the Red sea as by dry land, of which the Egyptians, having taken an attempt, were drowned.
By faith the walls of Jericho fell down, having been encircled for seven days.
By faith Rahab the harlot was not destroyed with those who were disobedient, having received the spies with peace.
what shall I say further? For the time would fail me telling about Gideon, also Barak and Samson and Jephthah, also of David and Samuel and the prophets,
who, through faith, conquered kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises, closed the mouths of lions,
quenched the force of fire, escaped the jaw of the sword. Out of weakness were made strong, became mighty in war, bowed down armies of aliens.
Women took hold of their dead from a resurrection,  others were tortured, not having accepted deliverance, so that they might experience a superior resurrection.
others took a trial of mockings and scourgings,  moreover of bonds and imprisonment.
They were stoned, they were sawed apart, they were tempted, they died in murder by sword. They wandered about in sheepskins, in goatskins, being destitute, restricted, tormented
of whom the world was not worthy), wandering in deserts and mountains and caves,  the holes of the earth.
all these, having been well reported through faith, did not receive the promise,
God having foreseen something superior concerning us, so that without us they would not be made fully perfect.
Therefore we also, having so great a cloud of witnesses surrounding us, having put off every weight and cleverly entangling sin, let us run by perseverance the contest being set before us.
Looking to Jesus the pathfinder and perfecter of the faith, who, against the joy set before him, endured a cross, having despised the shame,  has sat down at the right hand of the throne of God.
For consider the man who endured such hostility against him by sinners, so that ye may not be weary in your souls, being disheartened.
Ye have not yet resisted as far as blood, struggling against sin.
have ye forgotten the exhortation that reasons with you as with sons, My son, do not disparage the chastening of the Lord, nor become disheartened when punished by him?
For whom the Lord loves he chastens. And he whips every son whom he receives.
Because of chastening ye endure; God is treating you as with sons, for what son is there whom a father does not chasten?
if ye are without chastening, of which all have become participants, then ye are bastards,  not sons.
Besides, we indeed have had chastisers-the fathers of our flesh-and we were turned around. Shall we not much more be subordinate to the Father of the spirits,  we will live?
For those men indeed for a few days chastened us according to that which seemed good to them,  he for that which is advantageous, in order to be partakers of his holiness.
But of course no chastening for the present seems to be of joy but of sorrow, yet afterward it yields peaceable fruit of righteousness to those who have been trained by it.
Therefore lift up the drooping hands,  the feeble knees,
make straight paths for your feet, so that what is lame may not be turned away,  may be healed instead.
Pursue peace with all men,  the sanctification without which no man will see the Lord.
Looking carefully lest any man fall short, away from the grace of God, lest any root of bitterness sprouting up would cause trouble,  by this many may be defiled,
lest a fornicator or profane man like Esau, who, in place of one meal sold his birthright.
For ye also know that wanting afterward to inherit the blessing, he was rejected, for he found no place of repentance, though having sought it with tears.
For ye have not come to a mountain being felt,  which burned with fire,  to darkness,  gloom,  a tempest,
a sound of a trumpet,  a voice of words, of which those who heard begged that a word not be added to them.
For they did not bear that which was commanded, if even a beast should touch the mountain, it shall be stoned.
so fearful was that which was made visible, that Moses said, I am terrified and trembling.
But ye have come to mount Zion,  to the city of a living God, a heavenly Jerusalem,  to myriads of agents,
to a festal gathering and assembly of firstborn sons who were enrolled in the heavens,  to God, a Judge of all,  to spirits of righteous men who were made fully perfect,
to Jesus a mediator of a new covenant,  to blood of sprinkling that speaks better than Abel.
Watch, that ye not refuse him who speaks. For if those men did not escape, having refused him who spoke a divine message on earth, much more we, those who turn away from him from the heavens,
whose voice then shook the earth. But now he has promised, saying, Yet once, I shake not only the earth,  also the heaven.
the, Yet once, signifies the removal of the things being shaken-as of things that were made-so that the things not being shaken may remain.
Therefore, receiving an immovable kingdom, we may have grace, through which we may serve God acceptably with reverence and awe.
For our God is also a consuming fire.
Let brotherly love abide.
Do not forget love for strangers, for by this some lodged agents, unaware.
Remember the prisoners as being in bondage together, those who are ill-treated as also yourselves being in the body.
Marriage is precious in every way,  the undefiled bed,  God will judge fornicators and adulterers.
The Way of life is to be without love of money, being content with the things that are present, for he has said, I will, no, not leave thee,  also, I will, no, not forsake thee.
So then we have confidence to say, The Lord is a helper to me,  I will not fear. What will man do to me?
Remember those who lead you, men who spoke the word of God to you, of whom, carefully observing the outcome of their conduct, imitate the faith-
Jesus Christ, the same yesterday and today,  into the ages.
Be not carried away by various and foreign doctrines. For it is good that the heart be established with grace, not with foods by which those who walked were not benefited.
We have an altar from which they have no right to eat, those officiating at the tabernacle.
For of the beasts whose blood is brought into the holy things for sin by the high priest, the bodies of these are burned outside the camp.
Therefore Jesus also, so that he might sanctify the people through his own blood, suffered outside the gate.
Let us therefore go forth to him outside the camp, bearing his reproach.
For here we have no enduring city,  we seek that which is coming.
Through him therefore, let us offer up a sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is, fruit of lips acknowledging his name.
But do not forget benevolence and fellowship, for God is well pleased with such sacrifices.
Have confidence in those who lead you,  yield yourselves, for they watch for your souls as men who will render account, so that they may do this with joy,  not groaning, for this is unprofitable for you.
Pray about us, for we trust that we have a good conscience, desiring to behave well in all things.
But I urge you to do this even more, so that I may be restored to you sooner.
Now the God of peace, who brought up from the dead the great Shepherd of the sheep by the blood of an eternal covenant-our Lord Jesus-
may he make you fully qualified in every good work in order to do his will, doing in you what is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom is the glory into the ages of the ages. Truly.
I urge you, brothers, bear with the word of exhortation, for I also wrote to you in brief.
Know ye, brother Timothy who was set free is with whom I will see you, if he comes sooner.
Salute all those who lead you,  all the sanctified. The men from Italy salute you.
Grace is with you all. Truly.
James
James, a bondman of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ, to the twelve tribes in the Dispersion, greeting.
Consider it all joy, my brothers, when ye encounter various trials,
knowing that the testing of your faith produces perseverance.
let perseverance have a perfect work, so that ye may be perfect and complete, falling short in nothing.
if any of you lacks wisdom, let him ask from God who gives to all generously and not reproaching,  it will be given to him.
But let him ask in faith, doubting nothing, for he who doubts is like a wave of the sea driven by wind and tossed about.
For that man should not think that he will receive anything from the Lord,
a double-minded man, unstable in all his ways.
Now let the lowly brother boast in his exaltation,
but the rich in his lowliness, because as a flower of grass he will pass away.
For the sun rose up with the burning heat,  withered the grass. And the flower of it fell,  the beauty of its appearance perished. So also the rich man will fade away among his pursuits.
Blessed is a man who endures temptation, because, having become approved, he will receive the crown of life, which the Lord promised to those who love him.
Let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted by God, for God is without temptation of evils,  he himself tempts no man.
But each man is tempted by his own lust, being drawn away and enticed.
Then the lust having conceived, it gives birth to sin,  after being complete the sin brings forth death.
Be not led astray, my beloved brothers.
Every good gift and every perfect endowment is from above, coming down from the Father of lights, with whom there is no variation nor shadow of turning.
Having deliberated, he begot us by the word of truth for us to be a certain first fruit of his creatures.
Therefore, my beloved brothers, let every man be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath.
For the wrath of man does not accomplish the righteousness of God.
Therefore having put off all filthiness and profusion of evil, receive with meekness the engrafted word, which is able to save your souls.
But become ye doers of the word,  not hearers only, deceiving yourselves.
Because if any man is a hearer of the word and not a doer, this resembles a man observing his natural face in a mirror.
For he observes himself,  goes away,  straightaway forgets what kind of man he was.
But he who stooped to look into the perfect law, the one of liberty,  who remained, this man, who did not become a forgetful hearer but a doer of work, this man will be blessed in his doing.
If any man among you seems to be religious, not bridling his tongue but deceiving his heart, this man's religion is futile.
Pure religion and undefiled from God and the Father is this, to go help the orphaned and the widows in their affliction,  to keep himself unspotted from the world.
My brothers, ye should not have the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ of glory, in favoritism.
For if a man with a gold ring in bright clothing comes into your synagogue,  also a poor man in dirty clothing comes in,
ye have regard for the man wearing the bright clothing,  say to him, Sit thou here well,  ye say to the poor man, Stand thou there, or sit here below my footstool,
then are ye not partial among yourselves,  become judges from evil thoughts?
Listen, my beloved brothers, did not God choose the poor of the world, rich in faith,  heirs of the kingdom, which he promised to those who love him?
But ye have dishonored the poor man. Do not the rich exploit you,  they themselves drag you into courts?
Do they not blaspheme the good name that was called upon you?
If ye indeed fulfill the royal law according to the scripture, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself, ye do well.
But if ye respect personages, ye work sin, being convicted by the law as transgressors.
For whoever keeps the whole law,  stumbles on one, he has become guilty of all.
For he who said thou shall not commit adultery, also said thou shall not murder. Now if thou will not commit adultery,  murder, thou have become a transgressor of law.
So speak ye,  so do ye, as men who are to be judged by a law of liberty.
For the judgment is merciless to him who did no mercy. Mercy triumphs over judgment.
What is the benefit, my brothers, if some man should say to have faith,  has no works? Can the faith save him?
if a brother or sister may be unclothed,  may be destitute of daily food,
some man of you would say to them, Go in peace, be ye warmed and fed,  ye would not give them the things necessary for the body, what is the benefit?
So also faith, if it has no works, is dead by itself.
But some man will say, Thou have faith,  I have works. Show me thy faith from thy works,  I will show thee from my works my faith.
Thou believe that there is one God, thou do well. The demons also believe,  shudder.
But do thou want to know, O vain man, that faith apart from works is dead?
Was not Abraham our father made righteous from works, having offered up Isaac his son upon the altar?
Thou see that faith was working with his works,  from the works, faith was fully perfected.
the scripture was fulfilled, which says, And Abraham believed God,  it was reckoned to him for righteousness,  he was called a friend of God.
Ye see therefore that from works a man is made righteous,  not from faith only.
likewise also was not Rahab the harlot made righteous from works, having received the agents,  having sent them out another way?
For as the body without a spirit is dead, so also faith without the works is dead.
Not many should become teachers, my brothers, knowing that we will receive greater judgment.
For we all stumble in many things. If any man does not stumble in word, this is a perfect man, able also to bridle the whole body.
Behold we put bits into the mouths of horses for them to obey us,  we guide about their whole body.
Behold also the ships, being so great and driven by fierce winds, are guided about by a very small rudder, wherever the impulse of the man who steers determines.
So also the tongue is a little body-part,  boasts greatly. Behold a little fire, how much wood it kindles.
the tongue is a fire, the world of unrighteousness. Thus, the tongue is made to lead among our body-parts, defiling the whole body,  setting the cycle of nature on fire,  being set on fire by hell.
For every species, both of beasts and of birds, both of creeping things and things in the sea, is tamed,  has been tamed by the human species.
But no man is able to tame the tongue of men, an unruly evil, full of deadly poison.
By it we bless the God and Father,  by it we curse men, who were made according to a likeness of God.
Out of the same mouth proceeds blessing and curse. My brothers, these things ought not to happen this way.
Does the spring pour out from the same opening the sweet and the bitter?
A fig tree, my brothers, cannot make olives, or a grapevine figs. In the same way, no one spring makes water salty and sweet.
Who is wise and understanding among you? Let him show from his good behavior his works in meekness of wisdom.
But if ye have bitter envy and selfish ambition in your heart, do not boast,  do not lie against the truth.
This wisdom is not descending from above,  is earthly, world-soul, demonic.
For where envy and selfish ambition are, there is instability and every evil deed.
But the wisdom from above is indeed first pure, then peaceful, gentle, easily entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, impartial and non-hypocritical.
the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace to those who make peace.
From where are wars and fightings among you? Is it not from here: from your pleasures warring in your body-parts?
Ye desire and do not have, so ye murder. And ye envy and cannot obtain, so ye fight and make war. Ye do not have, because ye do not ask.
Ye ask,  do not receive, because ye ask wrongly, so that ye may spend on your pleasures.
Ye adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of the world is hatred of God? Whoever therefore wants to be a friend of the world becomes an enemy of God.
Or think ye that the scripture says vainly, The Spirit that he caused to dwell in us yearns with jealousy?
But he gives greater grace. Therefore it says, God is opposed to the arrogant,  gives grace to the lowly.
Be subordinate therefore to God,  resist the devil and he will flee from you.
Approach God and he will approach you. Cleanse the hands, ye sinners,  purify the hearts, ye double-minded.
Be ye sorrowful,  mourn,  weep. Let your laughter be turned into mourning,  your joy into a downcast look.
Be ye made lower in the sight of the Lord,  he will lift you up.
Speak not against each other, brothers. He who speaks against a brother and judges his brother, speaks against law and judges law. But if thou judge law, thou are not a doer of law,  a judge.
There is one lawgiver who is able to save and to destroy,  thou, who are thou who judge the other man?
Go now, men who say, Today and tomorrow we will go into this city,  will operate one year there,  will engage in trade and will get gain-
men who know not of the morrow. For what is your life? For it will be a vapor that appears for a little while,  then also vanishes away-
in place of your saying, If the Lord should will, then we will live and do this or that.
But now ye boast in your arrogance. All such boasting is evil.
He therefore who knows to do good,  is not doing it, to him it is sin.
Go now, ye rich, weep, howling for your miseries that are approaching.
Your wealth has decayed,  your garments have become moth-eaten.
Your gold and your silver have cankered,  their corrosion will be testimony against you,  will eat your flesh like fire. Ye have hoarded in the last days.
Behold the wage of the workmen who reaped your fields. The man who was defrauded by you cries out. And the outcries of those who reaped have entered into the ears of the Lord of hosts.
Ye have lived in luxury on the earth,  were self-indulgent. Ye have nourished your hearts as in a day of slaughter.
Ye have condemned, ye have murdered the righteous man. He is not hostile to you.
Be patient therefore, brothers, until the coming of the Lord. Behold, the farmer waits for the precious fruit of the earth, being patient for it, until it receives the early and latter rain.
Be ye also patient. Establish your hearts, because the coming of the Lord has approached.
Do not grumble, brothers, against each other, so that ye not be judged. Behold, the judge stands before the doors.
Take an example, my brothers, of evil-suffering and longsuffering, the prophets who spoke in the name of the Lord.
Behold, we regard those who endured, blessed. Ye have heard of the fortitude of Job,  have seen the outcome of the Lord, that he is very compassionate and merciful.
But above all things, my brothers, swear not. Neither by the heaven, nor the earth, nor any other oath,  let your yes be yes,  the no, no, so that ye may not fall into hypocrisy.
Is any man among you afflicted? Let him pray. Is any cheerful? Let him sing praise.
Is any man weak among you? Let him summon the elders of the congregation,  let them pray near him, having anointed him with olive oil in the name of the Lord.
the prayer of faith will rescue him who is depressed,  the Lord will rouse him. And if he should be a man who has committed sins, they will be forgiven him.
Confess ye the trespasses to each other,  pray for each other so that ye may be healed. A working supplication of a righteous man is very powerful.
Elijah was a man of the same nature as we. And by prayer, he asked for it not to rain,  it did not rain on the earth for three years and six months.
he prayed again,  the heaven gave rain,  the earth produced its fruit.
Brothers, if any man among you may be led astray from the truth,  some man converts him,
let him know that he who converts a sinful man from his wandering way, will save a soul from death,  will hide a multitude of sins.
I Peter
Pet. Peter, an apostle of Jesus Christ, to the chosen who are sojourners of the Dispersion of Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia,  Bithynia,
Pet. chosen according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, in sanctification of Spirit, for obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ: Grace to you,  peace be multiplied.
Pet. Blessed is the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who begot us again according to his abundant mercy for a living hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead,
Pet. for an inheritance imperishable,  undefiled,  unfading, reserved in heavens for you,
Pet. men being kept by the power of God through faith for a salvation ready to be revealed in the last time.
Pet. In which ye greatly rejoice, although made sorrowful in various trials. Since it is now necessary for a little while,
Pet. so that the proof of your faith, much more precious than gold that perishes,  though proven by fire, may be found for praise and esteem and for glory at the revealing of Jesus Christ.
Pet. Whom, not having seen, ye love, in whom, not now seeing but believing, ye exult in inexpressible and glorified joy,
Pet. receiving back the outcome of your faith, the salvation of souls.
Pet. About which salvation the prophets sought and searched diligently. Men who prophesied about the grace for you,
Pet. searching for what, or what kind of time the Spirit of Christ in them indicated, predicting the sufferings in Christ,  the glories after these things.
Pet. To whom it was revealed, that they were serving not themselves,  you, those things that were now reported to you by those who preached good news to you in the Holy Spirit, which was sent forth from heaven, into which things agents longed to stoop to see.
Pet. Therefore having girded up the loins of your mind, being sober, hope entirely for the grace brought to you at the revealing of Jesus Christ.
Pet. As children of obedience, not fashioning yourselves to the former desires in your ignorance,
Pet. but according to the Holy Man, he who called you, ye yourselves also become holy in all conduct,
Pet. because it is written, Become ye holy, since I am holy.
Pet. And if ye call on a Father, him who judges impartially according to each man's work, live the time of your sojourn in fear.
Pet. Knowing that ye were redeemed from your vain behavior inherited from fathers, not with perishable silver or gold,
Pet. but by precious blood, as of a lamb unblemished and unspotted-of Christ,
Pet. who was indeed foreknown before the foundation of the world,  was manifested in the last times because of you:
Pet. men who, because of him, believe in God who raised him from the dead,  gave him glory, in order for your faith and hope to be in God;
Pet. men who have purified your souls in obedience of the truth through the Spirit for non-hypocritical brotherly love. Ye should love each other fervently from a pure heart,
Pet. begotten again, not of corruptible seed,  of incorruptible, through the word of God that lives and remains into the age.
Pet. Because all flesh is as grass,  all the glory of man as a flower of grass. The grass withers,  the flower of it falls away,
Pet. but the word of the Lord endures into the age. And this is the word, the good news that was preached to you.
Pet. Therefore, having put off all evil and all deceit and hypocrisies and envies and all evil speaking,
Pet. as newborn babes, long for the genuine intellectual milk, so that ye may grow by it,
Pet. if indeed ye have tasted that the Lord is excellent.
Pet. Coming to whom, a living stone, rejected indeed by men,  with God chosen, precious,
Pet. ye also, as living stones, are built up a spiritual house, a holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God through Jesus Christ.
Pet. It is therefore contained in the scripture, Behold, I lay in Zion a chief corner stone, chosen, precious. And he who believes in him will, no, not be shamed.
Pet. To you therefore who believe is the preciousness,  for men who disobey, A stone that the builders rejected, this became the head of the corner,
Pet. and, A stone of stumbling and a rock of offense, men who stumble at the word, being disobedient, for which also they were set.
Pet. But ye are a chosen race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people for an acquired possession, so that ye might broadly proclaim the excellencies of him who called you out of darkness into his marvelous light.
Pet. Men formerly not a people,  now are a people of God. Men who had not obtained mercy,  who now have obtained mercy.
Pet. Beloved, I beseech you as aliens and sojourners, to abstain from the fleshly lusts, which war against the soul.
Pet. Having your behavior good among the Gentiles, so that, upon which they speak against you as evildoers, they may glorify God in the day of visitation, from having observed your good works.
Pet. Therefore because of the Lord, ye should submit to every human establishment, whether to a king as being supreme,
Pet. or to governors as being sent by him for vengeance of evildoers and praise of well-doers.
Pet. Because this way is the will of God, doing good to muzzle the ignorance of the foolish men.
Pet. As free,  not having your freedom as a cover-up of evil,  as bondmen of God.
Pet. Respect all men. Love the brotherhood. Fear God. Respect the king.
Pet. Household servants, submitting to the masters with all fear, not only to the good and gentle,  also to the wayward.
Pet. For this is graciousness, if, because of consciousness of God, any man endures sorrows, suffering wrongfully.
Pet. For what kind of credit is it, if, sinning and being beaten, ye will endure? But if, doing good and suffering, ye will endure, this is graciousness with God.
Pet. For ye were called for this. Because Christ also suffered for us, leaving you an example, so that ye should follow his footsteps.
Pet. Who did no sin, nor was deceit found in his mouth.
Pet. Who, being reviled, did not revile in return. Suffering, he did not threaten,  yielded to him who judges righteously.
Pet. Who himself took up our sins in his body upon the tree, so that we, having died to sins, might live to the righteousness of him from whose wound ye were healed.
Pet. For ye were like sheep going astray,  now were returned to the Shepherd and Guardian of your souls.
Pet. Likewise the wives, being subordinate to their own husbands, so that even if any are disobedient to the word, they will be gained without a word by the behavior of the wives,
Pet. observing, in fear, your pure behavior.
Pet. Of which let it not be the outward world of braiding of hair,  of wearing of gold, or of putting on apparel,
Pet. but the hidden man of the heart, in the incorruptible, of the meek and quiet spirit, which is very precious in the sight of God.
Pet. For this way formerly also, the holy women, trusting in God, adorned themselves, being subordinate to their own husbands,
Pet. as Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him lord, whose children ye became, doing good,  not being afraid of anything fearful.
Pet. Likewise the husbands living together knowledgeably, as with a weaker vessel, apportioning worth to the female as also joint-heirs of the grace of life, for your prayers not to be hindered.
Pet. And finally, all be like-minded, sympathetic, brother-loving, compassionate, friendly,
Pet. not rendering evil for evil, or reviling for reviling,  instead giving praise, knowing that ye were called for this, so that ye might inherit a blessing.
Pet. For he who wants to love life,  see good days, let him restrain his tongue from evil,  his lips not to speak deceit.
Pet. Let him turn away from evil,  do good. Let him seek peace,  pursue it.
Pet. Because the eyes of the Lord are toward the righteous,  his ears to their supplication,  the face of the Lord is against men who do evil things.
Pet. And who is he who will harm you, if ye become imitators of the good?
Pet. But even if ye should suffer because of righteousness, ye are blessed. But do not fear their terror nor be shaken,
Pet. but sanctify the Lord God in your hearts. And always be ready for a defense to every man who asks you a word about the hope in you, with meekness and fear.
Pet. Having a good conscience, so that, in what they speak against you as of evildoers, they may be ashamed, those who revile your good behavior in Christ.
Pet. For it is better to suffer doing good, if the will of God desires, than for doing evil.
Pet. Because Christ also once suffered for sins, a righteous man for unrighteous men, so that he might bring you to God. Having indeed been killed in flesh,  made alive in spirit,
Pet. in which also, having gone, he preached to the spirits in prison
Pet. who were disobedient formerly, when the longsuffering of God waited in the days of Noah who prepared an ark in which a few, that is, eight souls were saved through water.
Pet. Which counterpart-immersion-now also saves us, not the putting away of filth of flesh,  an appeal of a good conscience toward God, through the resurrection of Jesus Christ,
Pet. who is at the right hand of God, having gone into heaven, agents,  positions of authority,  powers having been subordinated to him.
Pet. Therefore of Christ having suffered in flesh for us, arm ye yourselves also with the same mentality, because he who has suffered in flesh has ceased from sin,
Pet. in order to live the remaining time in flesh, no longer by lusts of men,  by the will of God.
Pet. For enough time of life has past for you to accomplish the will of the Gentiles, having gone in debaucheries, lusts, excesses of wine, revelings, drinking parties,  lawless idolatries.
Pet. During which they think it strange of you not running together into the same pouring out of debauchery, while they slander.
Pet. Men who will give back an accounting to him who fares readily to judge the living and the dead.
Pet. For good news was preached even to the dead for this, so that they might indeed be judged according to men in flesh,  live according to God in spirit.
Pet. But the end of all things has approached. Therefore be serious,  be sober for the prayers.
Pet. And above all having fervent love for yourselves, because love will cover a multitude of sins,
Pet. stranger-loving toward each other without complaints.
Pet. As each has received a gift, serving it for yourselves, as good stewards of the manifold grace of God.
Pet. If any man speaks, as oracles of God. If any man serves, as of ability as God supplies. So that God may be glorified in all things through Jesus Christ, to whom is the glory and the dominion into the ages of the ages. Truly.
Pet. Beloved, ye should not be surprised at the fieriness in you, which occurs for a trial to you, like a strange thing happening to you.
Pet. But rejoice in so far as ye are partakers in the sufferings of the Christ, so that also at the revealing of his glory ye may rejoice, having exceeding joy.
Pet. Blessed are ye if ye are reviled for the name of Christ, because the Spirit of glory and of God rests upon you. From them he is indeed blasphemed,  from you he is glorified.
Pet. For let not any man of you suffer as a murderer, or a thief, or an evildoer, or as a busybody.
Pet. But if as a Christian, let him not be ashamed,  let him glorify God in this regard.
Pet. Because the time to begin judgment is from the house of God,  if first from us, what is the end of those who disobey the good news of God?
Pet. And if the righteous man is scarcely saved, where will the irreverent and sinful man appear?
Pet. Therefore also let those who suffer according to the will of God entrust their souls as to a faithful Creator by well-doing.
Pet. I, a fellow elder and witness of the sufferings of the Christ,  a partaker of the glory going be revealed, exhort the elders among you:
Pet. Tend ye the flock of God among you, watching over, not by obligation,  willingly, nor greedily,  readily,
Pet. nor as domineering over the lots,  becoming examples of the flock.
Pet. And when the chief Shepherd is made known, ye will receive the unfading crown of glory.
Pet. Likewise younger men should be subordinate to the elder men. And all being subordinate to each other, clothe yourselves with humility, because God sets himself against the haughty,  gives grace to the lowly.
Pet. Therefore be lowered under the mighty hand of God, so that he may lift you up in time,
Pet. having cast all your concern upon him, because he cares for you.
Pet. Be sober, be vigilant. Your opponent the devil, as a roaring lion, walks about seeking whom to devour.
Pet. Whom resist, steadfast in the faith, knowing the same sufferings are to be accomplished in the world by your brotherhood.
Pet. And may the God of all grace who called you to his eternal glory in Christ Jesus (after suffering a little while) himself thoroughly prepare you. He will establish, strengthen,  provide a foundation.
Pet. To him is the glory and the dominion into the ages of the ages. Truly.
Pet. By Silvanus, the faithful brother to you, as I reckon, I wrote because of a few things, exhorting and testifying this to be the true grace of God in which ye stand.
Pet. She in Babylon, chosen together, salutes you,  my son Mark.
Pet. Salute each other by a kiss of love. Peace to you, to all those in Christ Jesus. Truly.
II Peter
Pet. Simon Peter, a bondman and apostle of Jesus Christ, to those who have received an equally precious faith with us in the righteousness of our God and Savior Jesus Christ:
Pet. Grace to you and peace be multiplied in the knowledge of God and of Jesus our Lord,
Pet. as all things of his divine power to us, things toward life and piety, which were granted through the knowledge of him who called us through glory and virtue.
Pet. Because of which, the precious and greatest promises have been given to us, so that through these ye might become companions of the divine nature, having escaped from the corruption in the world in lust.
Pet. Now this same thing also, having applied all eagerness, furnish in your faith, virtue,  in virtue, knowledge,
Pet. and in knowledge, self-control,  in self-control, perseverance,  in perseverance, piety,
Pet. and in piety, brotherly affection,  in brotherly affection, love.
Pet. For these things existing in you and abounding, it leads to not being idle nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Pet. For he in whom these things are not present is blind, being near-sighted, having deliberately forgotten the purification of his former sins.
Pet. Therefore, brothers, instead be diligent to make your calling and selection sure, for doing these things, ye would, no, not ever stumble.
Pet. For so the entrance will be furnished to you abundantly into the eternal kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
Pet. Therefore I will not neglect to always remind you about these things, although having known them,  having been established in the present truth.
Pet. But I think it right, inasmuch as I am in this tent, to arouse you in memory.
Pet. Knowing that the putting off of my tent is imminent, even as also our Lord Jesus Christ indicated to me.
Pet. And also I will endeavor for you to always have, after my departure, the memory of these things to apply.
Pet. For we revealed to you the power and presence of our Lord Jesus Christ, not men who followed in cunningly devised myths,  men who became eyewitnesses of the majesty of that man.
Pet. For having received from God the Father honor and glory from a voice of such kind brought to him from the Majestic Glory, This is my Son, the beloved in whom I am well pleased.
Pet. And we heard this voice, which was brought out of heaven, being with him on the holy mountain.
Pet. And we have the prophetic word sure, to which ye do well giving heed, as to a lamp shining in a dark place, until the day dawns,  the daystar arises in your hearts.
Pet. Knowing this first, that no prophecy of scripture comes to pass of a personal interpretation.
Pet. For no prophecy was ever brought by a will of man,  holy men of God spoke, being led by the Holy Spirit.
Pet. But false prophets also developed among the people, as false teachers will also be among you, who will sneak in pernicious denominations, even denying the Master who bought them, bringing upon themselves swift destruction.
Pet. And many will follow their wantonness, because of whom the way of the truth will be blasphemed.
Pet. And they will exploit you in greed with fabricated words, whose judgment is not idle for long,  their destruction will not slumber.
Pet. For if God did not spare agents who sinned,  delivered them up to chains of darkness, having been cast into hell being reserved for judgment,
Pet. and he did not spare the ancient world,  preserved Noah, the eighth, a herald of righteousness, when he brought on a flood upon the world of the irreverent,
Pet. and he condemned the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah to destruction, being reduced to ashes, having made an example of men who were going to be irreverent,
Pet. and he rescued righteous Lot, being distressed by the conduct of the lawless in their licentiousness
Pet. (for that righteous man dwelling among them day after day, in the sight and hearing of their lawless deeds, it anguished his righteous soul),
Pet. the Lord knows how to rescue the pious out of temptation,  to hold in reserve unrighteous men being cut off for a day of judgment.
Pet. And especially those going rear of flesh in a degenerate lust,  who despise lordship. Reckless, self-willed men, they do not tremble when speaking evil of dignities.
Pet. Whereas agents, being greater in might and power, do not bring a railing judgment against them before the Lord.
Pet. But these men, like irrational beasts of nature, having been born for capture and destruction, speaking evil at which things they do not understand, will be destroyed in their corruption,
Pet. getting back a wage of unrighteousness. Men who consider soft living in the daytime to be pleasure, spots and blemishes reveling in their deceitfulness, feasting together with you,
Pet. having eyes full of adultery,  unceasing sin, enticing unstable souls, having a heart trained in greed, children of a curse,
Pet. having forsaken a straight path, they were led astray, men who followed the way of Balaam, son of Beor, who loved the wage of unrighteousness.
Pet. But he had a rebuke of his own lawbreaking. A mute donkey, uttering in a man's voice, restrained the madness of the prophet.
Pet. These men are waterless wells,  clouds driven by a fierce wind, for whom the gloom of darkness has been reserved into an age.
Pet. For, uttering swollen things of vanity, they entice (to sensuality by lusts of flesh) those who actually escaped from those who live in error,
Pet. promising them freedom, while they themselves are bondmen of corruption, for by what any man has been overcome, of this he has also been enslaved.
Pet. For if, having escaped the defilements of the world by knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, , having been again entangled in these, they are overcome, the last things have become worse for them than the first.
Pet. For it were better for them not to have known the way of righteousness, than having known it, to turn back from the holy commandment delivered to them.
Pet. But that of the true proverb has happened to them, The dog returning to his own vomit,  the sow that washed to wallowing in mire.
Pet. I write to you now this second letter, beloved, in which I arouse your sincere mind by a reminder,
Pet. to remember the sayings that were earlier spoken by the holy prophets,  of the command of your apostles of the Lord and Savior.
Pet. Knowing this first, that there will come at the end of the days, scoffers, proceeding according to their own desires,
Pet. and saying, Where is the promise of his coming? For, from since the fathers became asleep, all things continue this way from the beginning of creation.
Pet. For this is willfully ignored by them, that long ago there were heavens,  an earth that came together out of water and by water by the word of God,
Pet. by which the world then perished, having been overflowed with water.
Pet. But now the heavens and the earth, which have been stored up by the same word, are being preserved for fire in a day of judgment and destruction of irreverent men.
Pet. But beloved, let not this one thing be ignored by you, that one day with the Lord is as a thousand years,  a thousand years as one day.
Pet. The Lord is not slack about his promise, as some regard slackness,  is patient toward us, not wanting any to perish,  all to go forward to repentance.
Pet. But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night, during which the heavens will pass away with a roar,  the elements, being intensely hot, will be disintegrated,  the earth and the works in it will be destroyed by fire.
Pet. Therefore, all these things being disintegrated, what kind ought ye to be in holy actions and pieties,
Pet. anticipating and hastening the coming of the day of God, by which the heavens, being made fiery hot, will be disintegrated,  the elements dissolve, being intensely hot?
Pet. But we anticipate a new heavens and a new earth according to his promise, in which righteousness dwells.
Pet. Therefore, beloved, anticipating these things, be diligent to be found by him in peace, without spot and blameless.
Pet. And consider the longsuffering of our Lord, salvation, just as also our beloved brother Paul wrote to you according to the wisdom given to him,
Pet. as also in all his letters, speaking in them about these things, in which are some things hard to understand, which the ignorant and unstable twist, as also the other scriptures, to their own destruction.
Pet. Ye therefore, beloved, knowing in advance, keep watch, lest, having accommodated to the error of the lawless, ye fall from your own steadfastness.
Pet. But grow in the grace and knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. To him is the glory both now and into the day of the age. Truly.
I John
John. What was from the beginning, what we have heard, what we have seen with our eyes, what we looked upon,  our hands touched, concerning the Word of life
John. (and the life was made known,  we have seen,  testify,  declare to you the eternal life that was with the Father,  was made known to us),
John. what we have seen and heard we also declare to you, so that ye also may have fellowship with us. Even also our fellowship with the Father,  with his Son Jesus Christ.
John. And we write these things to you, so that our joy may be made full.
John. And this is the message that we have heard from him and declare to you, that God is light,  in him is no darkness at all.
John. If we say that we have fellowship with him and walk in the darkness, we lie,  do not the truth.
John. But if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship with each other,  the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from every sin.
John. If we say that we have no sin, we lead ourselves astray,  the truth is not in us.
John. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and righteous so that he will forgive us our sins,  cleanse us from every unrighteousness.
John. If we say that we have not sinned, we make him a liar,  his word is not in us.
John. My little children, I write these things to you so that ye may not sin. And if any man does sin, we have an advocate with the Father-righteous Jesus Christ.
John. And he is the atonement for our sins,  not for ours only,  also for the whole world.
John. And by this we know that we know him, if we keep his commandments.
John. He who says, I know him,  does not keep his commandments, is a liar,  the truth is not in this man.
John. But whoever keeps his word, truly in this man the love of God is fully perfected. By this we know that we are in him.
John. He who claims to abide in him he also ought so to walk just as that man walked.
John. Brothers, I write no new commandment to you,  an old commandment that ye had from the beginning. The old commandment is the word that ye heard from the beginning.
John. Again, a new commandment I write to you, which is true in him and in you, because the darkness is passing away,  the true light now shines.
John. He who claims to be in the light,  hates his brother, is in the darkness until now.
John. He who loves his brother abides in the light,  no cause of stumbling is in him.
John. But he who hates his brother is in the darkness,  he goes about in the darkness,  knows not where he goes, because the darkness has blinded his eyes.
John. I write to you, little children, because your sins have been forgiven you through his name.
John. I write to you, fathers, because ye have known him from the beginning. I write to you, young men, because ye have overcome evil. I write to you, children, because ye know the Father.
John. I wrote to you, fathers, because ye have know him from the beginning. I wrote to you, young men, because ye are strong,  the word of God abides in you,  ye have overcome evil.
John. Love not the world, nor the things in the world. If any man loves the world, the love of the Father is not in him.
John. Because everything in the world, the lust of the flesh,  the lust of the eyes,  the arrogance of life, is not of the Father,  is of the world.
John. And the world passes away,  the lust of it,  he who does the will of God abides into the age.
John. Children, it is the last hour. And as ye heard that the antichrist comes,  now many antichrists have developed, from which we know that it is the last hour.
John. They went out from us,  they were not of us. For if they were of us, they would have continued with us, -so that they might be made known, that they are not all of us.
John. And ye have an anointing from the Holy,  ye know all the things.
John. I wrote to you not because ye know not the truth,  because ye know it,  because no lie is of the truth.
John. Who is the liar if not he who denies that Jesus is the Christ? This is the antichrist, he who denies the Father and the Son.
John. Every man who denies the Son, also does not have the Father.
John. Therefore ye, let what ye heard from the beginning abide in you. If what ye heard from the beginning abides in you, ye also will abide in the Son and in the Father.
John. And this is the promise that he promised us: the eternal life.
John. I wrote these things to you concerning those who lead you astray.
John. And for you, the anointing that ye received from him abides in you,  ye have no need that any man teach you,  as the same anointing teaches you about all things,  is true and is no lie,  just as it taught you, ye will abide in him.
John. And now, little children, abide in him, so that when he is made known, we may have confidence,  not be shamed by him at his coming.
John. If ye know that he is righteous, know ye that every man doing righteousness has been begotten of him.
John. Behold what kind of love the Father has given to us, that we may be called children of God. Because of this the world does not know you, because it did not know him.
John. Beloved, now we are children of God,  it is not yet made known what we will be. But we know that whenever he is made known we will be like him, because we will see him as he is.
John. And every man who has this hope in him purifies himself, just as that man is pure.
John. Every man doing sin also does lawlessness,  sin is lawlessness.
John. And ye know that that man was made known so that he might take up our sins. And in him is no sin.
John. Every man abiding in him does not sin. Every man who is sinning has not seen him, nor has known him.
John. Little children, let no man lead you astray. He who is doing righteousness is righteous, just as that man is righteous.
John. He who is doing sin is of the devil, because the devil sinned from the beginning. The Son of God was made known for this, so that he might destroy the works of the devil.
John. Every man who has been begotten of God is not doing sin, because his seed abides in him,  he cannot sin, because he has been begotten of God.
John. By this the children of God are visible,  the children of the devil. Every man not doing righteousness is not of God,  he who is not loving his brother.
John. Because this is the message that ye heard from the beginning, that we should love each other.
John. Not as Cain. He was of the wicked,  murdered his brother. And why did he murder him? Because his works were wrong,  his brother's right.
John. Marvel not, my brothers, if the world hates you.
John. We know that we have passed out of death into life, because we love the brothers. He who is not loving the brother abides in death.
John. Every man hating his brother is a man-killer. And ye know that no man-killer has eternal life abiding in him.
John. By this we know love, because that man laid down his life for us. And we ought to lay down our lives for the brothers.
John. But whoever has the world's living,  sees his brother having need,  closes his bowels from him, how does the love of God abide in him?
John. My little children, we should not love in word, nor with the tongue,  in deed and in truth.
John. And by this we know that we are of the truth,  will assure our hearts before him.
John. Because if our heart should condemn us, that God is greater than our heart,  knows all things.
John. Beloved, if our heart should not condemn us, we have confidence toward God,
John. and whatever we may ask we receive from him, because we keep his commandments and do things pleasing in his sight.
John. And this is his commandment, that we should believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ,  love each other, just as he gave command.
John. And he who keeps his commandments abides in him,  he in him. And by this we know that he abides in us, from the Spirit that he gave us.
John. Beloved, do not believe every spirit,  examine the spirits, whether they are of God, because many false prophets have gone out into the world.
John. By this ye know the Spirit of God: every spirit that confesses Jesus Christ having come in flesh is of God,
John. and every spirit that does not confess Jesus Christ has come in flesh is not of God. And this is that of the antichrist, which ye have heard that it comes,  is now in the world already.
John. Ye are of God, little children,  ye have overcome them, because greater is he in you than he in the world.
John. They are of the world. Because of this they speak of the world,  the world hears them.
John. We are of God. He who knows God hears us. He who is not of God does not hear us. From this we know the spirit of truth,  the spirit of error.
John. Beloved, we should love each other. Because love is of God,  every man who loves has been begotten of God,  knows God.
John. He who does not love does not know God, because God is love.
John. By this the love of God was made known in us, because God sent his Son, the only begotten, into the world so that we might live through him.
John. In this is love, not that we loved God,  that he loved us,  sent his Son, an atonement for our sins.
John. Beloved, if God so loved us, we also are obligated to love each other.
John. No man has ever seen God. If we love each other, God abides in us,  his love is in us, having been fully perfected.
John. In this we know that we abide in him and he in us, because he has given us from his Spirit.
John. And we have seen and testify that the Father has sent the Son, a Savior of the world.
John. Whoever acknowledges that Jesus is the Son of God, God abides in him,  he in God.
John. And we know,  have believed the love that God has in us. God is love,  he who abides in love abides in God,  God abides in him.
John. By this love has been fully perfected with us, so that we may have boldness in the day of judgment, because just as that man is, we also are in this world.
John. Fear is not in love,  perfect love casts out fear, because fear holds punishment,  he who is afraid has not been fully perfected in love.
John. We love him, because he first loved us.
John. If any man says, I love God,  hates his brother, he is a liar. For he who does not love his brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen?
John. And we have this commandment from him, so that he who loves God will also love his brother.
John. Every man who believes that Jesus is the Christ has been begotten from God,  every man who loves him who begot, also loves him who has been begotten from him.
John. By this we know that we love the children of God, when we love God and keep his commandments.
John. For this is the love of God, that we may keep his commandments. And his commandments are not burdensome.
John. Because everything that has been begotten from God overcomes the world. And this is the victory that overcomes the world, our faith.
John. And who is he who overcomes the world, if not he who believes that Jesus is the Son of God?
John. This is he who came by water and blood, Jesus Christ, not by the water only,  by the water and the blood. And it is the Spirit that testifies, because the Spirit is truth.
John. Because those who testify are three:
John. the Spirit,  the water,  the blood. And the three are in one.
John. If we accept the testimony of men, the testimony of God is greater. Because this is the testimony of God that he has testified about his Son.
John. He who believes in the Son of God has the testimony in himself. He who does not believe God has made him a liar, because he has not believed in the testimony that God has testified about his Son.
John. And this is the testimony, that God gave eternal life to us,  this life is in his Son.
John. He who has the Son has the life. He who does not have the Son of God does not have the life.
John. I wrote these things to you, those who believe in the name of the Son of God, so that ye may know that ye have eternal life,  that ye may believe in the name of the Son of God.
John. And this is the confidence that we have toward him, that, if we ask anything according to his will, he hears us.
John. And if we know that he hears us, whatever we may ask, we know that we have the requests that we have asked from him.
John. If any man may see his brother sinning a sin not toward death, he will ask,  he will give life to him, to those not sinning toward death. There is sin toward death. I do not say that he should make request about that.
John. All unrighteousness is sin. And there is sin not toward death.
John. We know that every man who has been begotten from God does not sin,  he who was begotten from God keeps himself,  the evil does not touch him.
John. We know that we are of God,  the whole world is set in the evil.
John. And we know that the Son of God comes,  has given us understanding, so that we may know the true. And we are in the true, in his Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God,  the eternal life.
John. Little children, guard yourselves from the idols. Truly.
II John
John. The elder to the chosen lady and her children, whom I love in truth,  not only I,  also all those who know the truth,
John. because of the truth that abides in us,  will be with us into the age.
John. Grace, mercy, peace will be with us from God the Father,  from the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the Father, in truth and love.
John. I rejoice exceedingly that I have found of thy children walking in truth, just as we received commandment from the Father.
John. And now I beseech thee, lady, not as writing a new commandment to thee,  what we had from the beginning, that we would love each other.
John. And this is love, that we should walk according to his commandments. This is the commandment, just as ye heard from the beginning, that ye should walk in it.
John. Because many deceivers have gone forth into the world, those not acknowledging Jesus Christ coming in flesh. This is the deceiver and the antichrist.
John. Watch yourselves, so that we may not lose what we have wrought,  may receive a full reward.
John. Every man transgressing,  not abiding in the doctrine of the Christ, does not have God. The man abiding in the doctrine of the Christ, this man has both the Father and the Son.
John. If any man comes to you,  does not bring this doctrine, do not receive him into a house,  do not speak to him to rejoice.
John. For he who speaks to him to rejoice, partakes of his evil works.
John. Having many things, I did not want to write to you by paper and ink,  I hope to come to you,  to speak mouth to mouth, so that our joy may be filled.
John. The children of thy chosen sister salute thee. Truly.
III John
John. The elder to the beloved Gaius, whom I love in truth.
John. Beloved, I pray for thee to prosper concerning all things,  to be healthy, just as thy soul prospers.
John. For I rejoiced exceedingly of brothers coming and testifying to the truth of thee, just as thou walk in truth.
John. I have no greater joy than these things that I hear my children walking in truth.
John. Beloved, thou do a faithful thing, whatever thou work for the brothers and for strangers,
John. who testified about thy love in sight of the congregation, whom thou will do well having helped send on their way worthily of God.
John. For they went forth on behalf of the Name, taking nothing from the Gentiles.
John. We therefore ought to welcome such men, so that we might become fellow workmen for the truth.
John. I wrote to the congregation,  Diotrephes, who loves to be first of them, did not accept us.
John. Because of this, if I come, I will remember his works that he does, prating against us with evil words. And not being satisfied in these, he himself does not even accept the brothers,  he forbids those who would,  expels them out of the congregation.
John. Beloved, do not imitate the evil,  the good. The man doing right is of God. The man doing wrong has not seen God.
John. Demetrius has been testified by all,  by the truth itself. But we also testify,  ye know that our testimony is true.
John. I had many things to write,  I did not want to write to thee by pen and ink.
John. But I hope to see thee straightaway,  we will speak mouth to mouth. Peace to thee. The friends salute thee. Salute the friends by name.
Jude
Jude. Jude, a bondman of Jesus Christ,  brother of James, to the called, sanctified in God the Father,  kept for Jesus Christ:
Jude. Mercy to you and peace and love be multiplied.
Jude. Beloved, making all diligence to write to you about the common salvation, I had need to write to you exhorting you to earnestly contend for the faith that was once for all delivered to the sanctified.
Jude. For certain men have sneaked in, those written about formerly for this condemnation, irreverent men, perverting the grace of our God into licentiousness,  denying our only Master God,  our Lord Jesus Christ.
Jude. Now I want to remind you, ye having known this once, that the Lord, having saved a people out of the land of Egypt, afterward destroyed those who did not believe.
Jude. And the agents who did not keep their own principality,  left their own habitation, he has kept reserved in eternal bonds under darkness for the judgment of the great day.
Jude. As Sodom and Gomorrah,  the cities around them, the same kind of way with these who indulged in fornication,  who went rear of queer flesh, are set forth an example, undergoing the punishment of eternal fire.
Jude. Nevertheless in the same way also these men who dream, indeed defile flesh,  reject lordship,  speak evil of dignities.
Jude. But Michael the arch-agent, when he disputed with the devil, contending about the body of Moses, dared not bring a railing judgment,  said, May the Lord rebuke thee.
Jude. But these men indeed revile whatever they have not seen. But whatever they understand naturally, as the irrational beasts, in these things they are corrupted.
Jude. Woe to them! Because they went in the way of Cain,  rushed to the error of Balaam's reward,  perished in the rebellion of Korah.
Jude. These are reefs in your love-feasts, feasting together, fearlessly tending to themselves, waterless clouds carried along by winds, autumn trees without fruit, who died twice having being uprooted,
Jude. wild waves of the sea foaming out their own shame, wandering stars for whom the gloom of darkness has been reserved into an age.
Jude. And Enoch also, the seventh from Adam, prophesied about these men, saying, Behold, the Lord came with his holy myriads,
Jude. to execute judgment against all,  to convict all the irreverent of them about all the works of their own irreverence that they have done irreverently,  about all the harsh things that irreverent sinners spoke against him.
Jude. These are grumblers, fault-finders, going according to their lusts,  their mouth speaks overblown things, marveling personages for the sake of advantage.
Jude. But ye, beloved, remember the sayings previously spoken by the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ,
Jude. that they told you that there will be scoffers during the last time, going according to their own desires of irreverences.
Jude. These are those who make divisions, world-soul men, not having Spirit.
Jude. But ye beloved, building up yourselves in your most holy faith, praying in the Holy Spirit,
Jude. keep yourselves in the love of God, awaiting the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ for eternal life.
Jude. And on some be ye merciful-being discerning.
Jude. And in fear save some, snatching them out of the fire, hating even the garment that was stained by the flesh.
Jude. Now to him who is able to keep them non-stumbling,  to present before his glory, unblemished in gladness,
Jude. to the only wise God our Savior, is glory, majesty, dominion and power, both now and into all the ages. Truly.
Revelation of John
The Revelation of Jesus Christ that God gave him to show his bondmen what must happen quickly. And he signified it, having sent by his agent to his bondman John
who testified the word of God and the testimony of Jesus Christ, as many things as he saw.
Blessed is he who reads,  those who hear the words of the prophecy,  who keep the things written in it, for the time is near.
John, to the seven congregations in Asia: Grace to you and peace from God, who is and who was and who is coming,  from the seven Spirits that are before his throne,
from Jesus Christ, the faithful witness, the firstborn of the dead,  the ruler of the kings of the earth. To him who loves us and washed us from our sins by his blood
made us a kingdom, priests to his God and Father, to him is the glory and the dominion into the ages of the ages. Truly.
Behold, he comes with the clouds and every eye will see him, even the men who pierced him. And all the tribes of the earth will wail against him. Yea, Truly.
I am the Alpha and the Omega, says the Lord, the God who is and who was and who is coming, the Almighty.
I John, your brother and companion in the tribulation and kingdom and perseverance in Christ Jesus, happened to be on the isle that is called Patmos because of the word of God,  because of the testimony of Jesus Christ.
I became in spirit on the Lord's day and I heard behind me a great voice like a trumpet
saying, What thou see, write in a book and send to the seven congregations: to Ephesus,  to Smyrna,  to Pergamos,  to Thyatira,  to Sardis,  to Philadelphia,  to Laodicea.
I turned there to see the voice that spoke with me. And having turned I saw seven golden lampstands.
in the midst of the seven lampstands, resembling a son of man, he who was clothed down to the foot,  girded about with a golden belt at the breasts.
his head and hair were white as wool, white as snow,  his eyes as a flame of fire,
his feet resembling highly refined metal, as in a furnace having been fiery hot,  his voice as the sound of many waters,
having in his right hand seven stars,  a sharp two-edged sword coming out of his mouth. And the sight of him was as the sun shines in its strength.
when I saw him, I fell at his feet as dead. And he laid his right hand upon me, saying, Fear not, I am the first and the last,
he who lives. And I became dead,  behold, I am living into the ages of the ages. Truly. And I have the keys of death and of Hades.
Therefore write the things that thou saw,  things that are,  things that are going to happen after these things.
The mystery of the seven stars that thou saw in my right hand,  the seven golden lampstands: the seven stars are agents of the seven congregations,  the seven lampstands that thou saw are the seven congregations.
To the agent of the congregation in Ephesus write, These things says he who holds the seven stars in his right hand, he who walks in the midst of the seven golden lampstands:
I know thy works,  thy toil,  thy perseverance,  that thou cannot tolerate evil,  thou examined those who say themselves to be apostles,  are not,  found them false.
thou have perseverance. And thou endured because of my name,  did not become weary.
Nevertheless, I have against thee because thou left thy first love.
Remember therefore from where thou have fallen,  repent and do the first works. And if not, I come to thee quickly,  will move thy lampstand out of its place, if thou do not repent.
But this thou have, that thou hate the works of the Nicolaitans, which I also hate.
He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the congregations. To him who overcomes, I will give him to eat from the tree of life that is in the midst of the paradise of my God.
to the agent of the congregation in Smyrna write, These things says the first and the last, who became dead,  lived:
I know thy works and tribulation and poverty (but thou are rich),  the blasphemy of those who say themselves to be Jews,  are not,  are a synagogue of Satan.
Fear none of the things that thou are going to suffer. Behold, the devil is indeed going to cast some of you into prison, so that ye may be tried,  ye will have tribulation ten days. Become thou faithful until death,  I will give thee the crown of life.
He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the congregations. He who overcomes will, no, not be hurt from the second death.
to the agent of the congregation in Pergamos write, These things says he who has the sharp two-edged sword:
I know thy works,  where thou dwell, where Satan's throne is. And thou hold firm my name,  did not deny my faith in the days in which Antipas was my faithful witness, who was killed among you where Satan dwells.
But I have a few things against thee, because thou have there men who adhere to the teaching of Balaam, who taught Balak to cast a snare before the sons of Israel, even to eat idol sacrifices,  to fornicate.
So also thou have men who likewise adhere to the teaching of the Nicolaitans.
Repent therefore,  if not I come to thee quickly,  will war against them with the sword of my mouth.
He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the congregations. To him who overcomes, I will give him to eat of the hidden manna. And I will give him a white stone,  upon the stone a new name written, which none knows except he who receives it.
to the agent of the congregation in Thyatira write, These things says the Son of God, who has his eyes as a flame of fire,  his feet resembling highly refined metal:
I know thy works,  thy love and faith and service and perseverance. And thy last works are more than the first.
Nevertheless, I have against thee that thou tolerate thy woman Jezebel. She calls herself a prophetess,  teaches and leads astray my bondmen to fornicate,  to eat idol sacrifices.
I gave her time so that she would repent,  she did not want to repent of her fornication.
Behold, I throw her into a bed,  those who commit adultery with her into great tribulation, if they do not repent of her works.
I will kill her children in death. And all the congregations will know that I am he who searches the inner feelings and hearts. And I will give to you-to each-according to your works.
But I say to you, to those remaining in Thyatira, as many as have not this teaching, who do not know, as they say, the deep things of Satan, I do not cast upon you another burden.
But hold firm what ye have until I come.
he who overcomes,  he who keeps my works until the end, to him I will give authority over the nations.
he will tend them with a rod of iron (they will be shattered like ceramic vessels), as I also have received from my Father.
I will give him the morning star.
He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the congregations.
to the agent of the congregation in Sardis write, These things says he who has the seven Spirits of God,  the seven stars: I know thy works, that thou have a name that thou live,  thou are dead.
Become thou watchful,  strengthen the remaining things that thou were going to throw away, for I have not found thy works made complete before my God.
Remember therefore how thou have received and heard,  be on guard,  repent. If therefore thou will not watch, I will come upon thee as a thief,  thou will, no, not know what hour I will come upon thee.
But thou have a few names in Sardis who did not defile their garments. And they will walk with me in white, because they are worthy.
He who overcomes, this man will be clothed in white garments,  I will, no, not erase his name out of the book of life. And I will acknowledge his name before my Father,  before his agents.
He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the congregations.
to the agent of the congregation in Philadelphia write, These things says the Holy, the True, he who has the key of David, who opens,  none will shut it except he who opens,  none will open:
I know thy works. Behold, I have given before thee an opened door that none is able to shut it, because thou have little power,  thou keep my word,  did not deny my name.
Behold, I give of the synagogue of Satan, those who say themselves to be Jews,  are not,  lie, behold, I will make them so that they will come and bow down before thy feet,  may know that I have loved thee.
Because thou keep the word of my perseverance, I also will keep thee from the hour of trial that is going to come upon the whole inhabited world, to try those who dwell upon the earth.
I come quickly, hold firm what thou have, so that none may take thy crown.
He who overcomes, I will make him a pillar in the temple of my God,  he will, no, not go out any more. And I will write upon him the name of my God,  the name of the city of my God, the new Jerusalem (it comes down out of the heaven from my God),  my new name.
He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the congregations.
to the agent of the congregation in Laodicea write, These things says the Truly, the faithful and true witness, the primacy of the creation of God:
I know thy works, that thou are neither cold nor hot. O that thou were cold or hot.
So because thou are lukewarm,  neither hot nor cold, I am going to spew thee out of my mouth.
Because thou say, I am rich,  have become wealthy,  have need of nothing,  do not know that thou are wretched and miserable and poor and blind and naked.
I counsel thee to buy from me gold refined from fire, so that thou may become wealthy,  white garments, so that thou may clothe thyself,  the shame of thy nakedness may not be made known,  eye-salve, so that thou may anoint thine eyes, so that thou may see.
As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten. Be zealous therefore,  repent.
Behold, I stand at the door and knock. If any man hears my voice and opens the door, I will come in to him,  will dine with him,  he with me.
He who overcomes, I will give him to sit with me in my throne, as I also overcame,  sat down with my Father in his throne.
He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the congregations.
After these things I looked,  behold, a door opened in heaven,  the first voice that I heard like a trumpet, speaking with me, saying, Come up here,  I will show thee what must happen after these things.
straightaway I became in spirit. And behold, a throne was set in heaven,  him sitting upon the throne
similar in appearance to a jasper and a sardius stone. And a rainbow was around the throne, like an emerald in appearance.
around the throne were twenty-four thrones,  upon the thrones were sitting twenty-four elders clothed in white garments,  golden crowns upon their heads.
out of the throne proceeds lightnings and voices and thunders. And seven lamps of fire burned before his throne, which are the seven Spirits of God.
before the throne was like a glassy sea similar to crystal. And in the midst of the throne,  all around the throne, were four living creatures containing eyes in front and back.
the first living creature was similar to a lion,  the second living creature was similar to a young bull,  the third living creature having a face like a man,  the fourth living creature was similar to a flying eagle.
the four living creatures, one by one, each having six wings, are full of eyes around and inside. And they have no cessation day and night, saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord, the Almighty God, he was,  who is,  who is coming.
whenever the living creatures give glory and honor and thanks to him who sits on the throne, he who lives into the ages of the ages,
the twenty-four elders would fall down before him who sits on the throne,  would worship him who lives into the ages of the ages,  would cast their crowns before the throne, saying,
Thou are worthy, our Lord and God, the Holy, to take the glory and the honor and the power, because thou created all things,  because by thy will they are,  were created.
I saw at the right hand of him who sits on the throne a book, written inside and outside, sealed with seven seals.
I saw a powerful agent proclaiming in a great voice, Who is worthy to open the book,  to loose the seals of it?
none in heaven above nor on the earth nor under the earth was able to open the book or to see in it.
I wept much because none was found worthy to open the book or to see in it.
one of the elders says to me, Weep not, behold, the Lion of the tribe of Judah, the Root of David, overcame to open the book and the seven seals of it.
I saw in the midst of the throne and of the four living creatures,  in the midst of the elders, a Lamb standing, like it had been killed, having seven horns and seven eyes, which are the seven Spirits of God being sent forth into all the earth.
he came and took it out of the right hand of him who sits on the throne.
when he took the book, the four living creatures and the twenty-four elders fell down before the Lamb, each having a harp and golden bowls containing incense, which are the prayers of the sanctified.
they sing a new song, saying, Thou are worthy to take the book and to open the seals of it, because thou were killed and purchased us from God by thy blood, out of every tribe,  tongue,  people,  nation.
thou made them kings and priests to our God,  they will reign over the earth.
I looked,  I heard as a voice of many agents all around the throne and the living creatures and the elders. And the number of them was ten thousands of ten thousands,  thousands of thousands,
saying with a great voice, Worthy is the Lamb that has been killed to receive the power,  wealth,  wisdom,  strength,  honor,  glory,  blessing!
every creature that is in the heaven,  on the earth,  under the earth,  is in the sea,  things in them all, I heard saying, The blessing,  the honor,  the glory,  the dominion is to him who sits upon the throne,  to the Lamb, into the ages of the ages. Truly!
the four living creatures were saying the Truly. And the elders fell down and worshiped.
I saw that the Lamb opened one of the seven seals. And I heard one of the four living creatures saying like the sound of thunder, Come and see.
behold, a white horse,  he who sits on it having a bow. And a crown was given to him,  he went forth conquering,  so that he might conquer.
when he opened the second seal, I heard the second living creature saying, Come.
another horse came forth, fiery red. And it was given to him (to him who sits on it) to take peace from the earth, so that they would kill each other. And a great sword was given to him.
when he opened the third seal, I heard the third living creature saying, Come and see. And behold, a black horse,  he who sits on it having a balance in his hand.
I heard a voice in the midst of the four living creatures saying, A measure of wheat for a denarius,  three measures of barley for a denarius. And thou may not harm the olive oil and the wine.
when he opened the fourth seal, I heard the fourth living creature saying, Come and see.
behold, a green horse,  he who sits on top of it. His name was Death,  Hades followed with him. And authority was given to him over the fourth part of the earth, to kill with sword,  with starvation,  with what is deadly,  by the beasts of the earth.
when he opened the fifth seal, I saw underneath the altar the souls of those who had been killed because of the word of God,  because of the testimony of the Lamb that they held.
they cried out in a great voice, saying, Master, Holy and True, how long do thou not judge and avenge our blood from those who dwell on the earth?
a white robe was given to them each,  it was said to them that they should still rest a time, until also their fellow bondmen,  their brothers,  those going to be killed as they too, would be fulfilled.
I looked when he opened the sixth seal,  a great earthquake occurred,  the sun became black as hairy sackcloth,  the whole moon became as blood.
the stars of the sky fell to the earth as a fig tree that casts its unripe figs being shaken by a great wind.
the sky departed as a scroll being rolled up. And every mountain and island were moved out of their places.
the kings of the earth,  the rulers,  the chief captains,  the rich,  the strong,  every bondman and freeman, hid themselves in the caves and in the rocks of the mountains.
they say to the mountains and to the rocks, Fall on us,  hide us from the face of him who sits on the throne,  from the wrath of the Lamb.
Because the great day of his wrath has come,  who is able to stand?
after this I saw four agents standing at the four corners of the earth, restraining the four winds of the earth, so that wind would not blow on the earth, or on the sea, or upon any tree.
I saw another agent ascending from the rising of the sun, having a seal of the living God. And he cried out in a great voice to the four agents to whom it was given to them to harm the earth and the sea,
saying, Do not harm the earth, nor the sea, nor the trees, until we may seal the bondmen of our God on their foreheads.
I heard the number of those sealed, a hundred and forty-four thousand sealed out of every tribe of the sons of Israel.
Twelve thousand were sealed from the tribe of Judah, twelve thousand from the tribe of Reuben, twelve thousand from the tribe of Gad,
twelve thousand from the tribe of Asher, twelve thousand from the tribe of Naphtali, twelve thousand from the tribe of Manasseh,
twelve thousand from the tribe of Simeon, twelve thousand from the tribe of Levi, twelve thousand from the tribe of Issachar,
twelve thousand from the tribe of Zebulun, twelve thousand from the tribe of Joseph, twelve thousand from the tribe of Benjamin, were sealed.
After these things, I looked and lo, a great multitude, which none could number, out of every nation,  tribes and peoples and tongues, standing before the throne and before the Lamb, clothed in white robes,  palms in their hands,
crying out in a great voice, saying, Salvation is in our God who sits upon the throne,  in the Lamb!
all the agents had stood all around the throne,  the elders,  the four living creatures,  they fell before his throne on their faces,  worshiped God,
saying, Truly! Blessing,  glory,  wisdom,  thanksgiving,  honor,  power,  strength, is for our God into the ages of the ages. Truly!
one of the elders answered, saying to me, Who are these who are clothed in white robes,  where did they come from?
I said to him, My lord, thou know. And he said to me, These are those coming out of the great tribulation,  they washed their robes,  made them white in the blood of the Lamb.
Because of this they are before the throne of God,  they serve him day and night in his temple. And he who sits on the throne will dwell among them.
They will hunger no more, nor will they thirst any more. The sun will, no, not fall upon them, nor any heat.
Because the Lamb in the midst of the throne will tend them,  will lead them to fountains of waters of life. And God will wipe away every tear from their eyes.
when he opened the seventh seal, silence occurred in heaven, like half an hour.
I saw the seven agents who stand before God,  seven trumpets were given to them.
another agent came and stood at the altar, having a golden censer. And much incense was given to him, so that he would give with the prayers of all the sanctified upon the golden altar before the throne.
the vapor of the incense, with the prayers of the sanctified, ascended before God out of the agent's hand.
the agent who took the censer, also filled it from the fire of the altar,  cast it to the earth. And there occurred thunders,  voices,  lightnings,  an earthquake.
the seven agents who have the seven trumpets prepared themselves so that they might sound.
the first sounded,  there occurred hail and fire mingled with blood,  they were cast upon the earth. And the third part of the earth was burnt up,  the third part of the trees was burnt up,  all green grass was burnt up.
the second agent sounded,  something like a great burning mountain was cast into the sea. And the third part of the sea became blood,
the third part of the creatures in the sea (those having lives) died,  the third part of the ships was destroyed.
the third agent sounded,  a great star fell from the heaven burning like a torch,  it fell upon the third part of the rivers,  upon the springs of the waters.
the name of the star is called Wormwood oil. And the third part of the waters developed into wormwood oil,  many of the men died from the waters, because they were made bitter.
the fourth agent sounded,  the third part of the sun was struck,  the third part of the moon,  the third part of the stars, so that the third part of them would be darkened. And the day did not shine the third part of it,  likewise the night.
I looked,  I heard one eagle flying in mid-heaven, saying in a great voice, Woe, woe, woe, to those who dwell on the earth from the remaining sounds of the trumpet of the three agents who are going to sound.
the fifth agent sounded,  I saw a star fallen from the sky to the earth. And the key of the pit of the abyss was given to him.
he opened the pit of the abyss,  smoke ascended out of the pit, like smoke of a burning furnace. And the sun and the air were darkened from the smoke of the pit.
locusts came forth out of the smoke upon the earth,  power was given to them, like the scorpions of the earth have power.
it was told them that they should not hurt the grass of the earth, nor anything green, nor any tree, except the men who have not the seal of God on their foreheads.
it was given them that they would not kill them,  that they would be tormented five months. And their torment was as the torment of a scorpion when it strikes a man.
in those days men will seek death,  will, no, not find it. And they will long to die,  death will flee from them.
the likeness of the locusts was similar to horses prepared for battle. And upon their heads were like golden crowns,  their faces were as men's faces.
they had hair like the hair of women,  their teeth were as of lions.
they had breastplates like iron breastplates. And the sound of their wings was like the sound of chariots of many horses running into battle.
they have tails similar to scorpions,  stings. And in their tails they have power to hurt men five months.
Having a king over them, the agent of the abyss, whose name in Hebrew is Abaddon,  in the Greek he has the name Apollyon.
One woe is departed, behold, two woes yet come after these.
the sixth agent sounded,  I heard a voice, one from the four horns of the golden altar before God,
saying to the sixth agent who has the trumpet, Loose the four agents who have been bound at the great river Euphrates.
the four agents were loosed, who were prepared for the hour and for the day and month and year, so that they would kill the third part of men.
the number of the armies of the horsemen was ten thousands of ten thousands. I heard the number of them.
thus I saw the horses in the vision,  those who sit on them having breastplates fiery red,  hyacinth color,  brimstone. And the heads of the horses are like heads of lions,  out of their mouths come fire and smoke and brimstone.
By these three plagues the third part of men was killed, by the fire and the smoke and the brimstone coming out of their mouths.
For the power of the horses is in their mouth,  in their tails. For their tails are similar to serpents, having heads,  by them they injure.
the rest of the men who were not killed by these plagues, did not repent of the works of their hands, so that they would not worship the demons,  the golden and silver and brass and stone and wooden idols, which can neither see nor hear nor walk.
they did not repent of their murders, nor of their sorceries, nor of their fornication, nor of their thefts.
I saw a mighty agent coming down out of heaven, clothed with a cloud,  the rainbow was upon his head,  his face was like the sun,  his feet like pillars of fire,
having in his hand an opened book. And he placed his right foot upon the sea,  the left upon the earth.
he cried out in a great voice as a lion roars. And when he cried out, the seven thunders uttered their voices.
when the seven thunders uttered, I was going to write. And I heard a voice from heaven saying, Seal up what the seven thunders uttered,  do not write them.
the agent whom I saw standing upon the sea and upon the earth raised his right hand to heaven,
swore by him who lives into the ages of the ages, who created the heaven and the things in it,  the earth and the things in it,  the sea and the things in it, that time would be no more.
But in the days of the voice of the seventh agent, when he is going to sound, even the mystery of God is finished, as he declared the good news to his bondmen the prophets.
the voice that I heard from heaven was again speaking with me,  saying, Go, take the little book that has been opened in the hand of the agent who stands upon the sea and upon the earth.
I went to the agent, telling him to give me the little book. And he says to me, Take and eat it. And it will make thy belly bitter,  it will be sweet as honey in thy mouth.
I took the book out of the agent's hand,  ate it. And it was sweet as honey in my mouth,  when I had eaten it, my belly was made bitter.
he says to me, Thou must prophesy again against many peoples,  against nations and tongues and kings.
there was given me a reed similar to a rod, saying, Rise,  measure the temple of God,  the altar,  those who worship in it.
leave out the court outside the temple,  do not measure it, because it has been given to the nations. And they will trample the holy city forty-two months.
I will give to my two witnesses,  they will prophesy a thousand two hundred and sixty days clothed in sackcloth.
These men are the two olive trees and the two lampstands, having stood before the Lord of the earth.
if any man wants to harm them, fire comes out of their mouth and devours their enemies. And if any man wants to harm them, he must be killed this way.
These men have authority to shut the sky, so that it may not rain the days of their prophecy. And they have authority over the waters to turn them into blood,  to strike the earth with every plague, as often as they may desire.
when they have finished their testimony, the beast that ascends out of the abyss will make war with them,  he will overcome them and kill them.
their corpses are in the thoroughfare of the great city, which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where also their Lord was crucified.
out of the peoples and tribes and tongues and nations they see their corpses three and a half days. And they will not allow their corpses to be put in a sepulcher.
those who dwell upon the earth rejoice over them,  will celebrate,  will give gifts to each other, because these two prophets tormented those who dwell on the earth.
after the three and a half days a spirit of life from God entered into them,  they stood upon their feet,  great fear fell upon those who watched them.
I heard a great voice from heaven saying to them, Come up here. And they ascended up into heaven in the cloud,  their enemies watched them.
in that day a great earthquake occurred,  the tenth part of the city fell. And seven thousand names of men were killed in the earthquake. And the rest became afraid,  gave glory to the God of heaven.
The second woe departed. Behold, the third woe comes quickly.
the seventh agent sounded,  great voices occurred in heaven, saying, The kingdom of the world has become of our Lord,  of his Christ,  he will reign into the ages of the ages.
the twenty-four elders who sit before the throne of God, on their thrones, fell upon their faces and worshiped God,
saying, We thank thee, Lord God Almighty, who is and was, because thou have taken thy great power and reigned.
the nations were angry. And thy wrath came,  the time of the dead to be judged,  to give the reward to thy bondmen the prophets,  to the sanctified,  to those who fear thy name, the small and the great,  to destroy those who destroy the earth.
the temple of God was opened in heaven,  the ark of the covenant of the Lord was seen in his temple. And there occurred lightnings,  voices,  thunders,  great hail.
a great sign was seen in heaven. A woman clothed with the sun,  the moon under her feet,  a crown of twelve stars upon her head.
having in her womb, she cried out, suffering birth pains,  suffering to give birth.
another sign was seen in heaven. And behold, a great fiery red dragon, having seven heads and ten horns,  seven diadems upon his heads.
his tail drags the third part of the stars of the sky,  cast them to the earth. And the dragon stood before the woman who was going to give birth, so that when she gave birth he might devour her child.
she gave birth to a son, a male who was going to tend all the nations with an iron rod. And her child was taken up to God and to his throne.
the woman fled into the wilderness where she has a place there prepared by God, so that they may nourish her there a thousand two hundred sixty days.
war developed in heaven: Michael and his agents to fight with the dragon. And the dragon and his agents fought.
he did not prevail, nor was a place found for him any more in heaven.
the great dragon was cast out, the ancient serpent, called the Devil and Satan, he who leads the whole world astray. He was cast out to the earth,  his agents were cast out with him.
I heard a great voice in heaven, saying, Now it came to pass, the salvation,  the power,  the kingdom of our God,  the authority of his Christ. Because the accuser of our brothers was cast out, who accuses them before our God day and night.
they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb,  by the word of their testimony. And they loved not their life to the point of death.
Rejoice because of this, O heavens,  ye who dwell in them. Woe to the earth and the sea, because the devil has come down to you, having great wrath, knowing that he has little time.
when the dragon saw that he was cast to the earth, he persecuted the woman who gave birth to the male.
two wings of the great eagle were given to the woman, so that she might fly into the wilderness to her place. So that she might be nourished there for a time,  times,  half a time, from the face of the serpent.
the serpent cast water like a river out of his mouth after the woman, so that he might make her carried away by the flood.
the earth helped the woman. And the earth opened its mouth and swallowed the river that the dragon cast out of his mouth.
the dragon was angry toward the woman,  went to make war with the remnant of her seed, those keeping the commandments of God,  having the testimony of Jesus.
I stood upon the sand of the sea. And I saw a beast rising up out of the sea having ten horns,  seven heads,  ten diadems upon its horns,  upon its heads names of blasphemy.
the beast that I saw was similar to a leopard. And its feet were like a bear,  its mouth like the mouth of a lion. And the dragon gave to it his power,  his throne,  great authority.
one of its heads was as in death, having been killed. And its deadly wound was healed. And the whole earth marveled behind the beast.
they worshiped the dragon who gave authority to the beast. And they worshiped the beast, saying, Who is like the beast,  who is able to war against it?
a mouth was given to it speaking great things and blasphemy. And authority was given it to make war forty-two months.
it opened its mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name and his tabernacle, those who dwell in heaven.
it was given it to make war with the sanctified,  to overcome them. And authority over every tribe and people and tongue and nation was given to it.
all who dwell upon the earth will worship it, whose name has not been written in the book of life of the Lamb who was killed from the foundation of the world.
If any man has an ear, let him hear.
If any man keeps in captivity, he goes. If any man kills with a sword, he must be killed with a sword. Here is the perseverance and the faith of the sanctified.
I saw another beast coming up out of the earth,  it had two horns similar to a lamb,  it spoke like a dragon.
it exercises all the authority of the first beast before it. And it made the earth and those who dwell in it so that they would worship the first beast, whose mortal wound was healed.
it does great signs, so that even fire would come down out of the sky upon the earth in the sight of men.
it leads my kind astray (those dwelling on the earth) because of the signs that were given it to do in the sight of the beast, telling those who dwell on the earth to make an image to the beast that had the sword-wound and lived.
it was given it to give a spirit to the image of the beast, so that the image of the beast would both speak,  would make as many as would not ever worship the image of the beast be killed.
it makes all, the small and the great,  the rich and the poor,  the freemen and the bondmen, that they would give them marks on their right hand, or on their foreheads.
so that not any man can buy or sell unless having the mark-the name of the beast or the number of its name.
Here is wisdom: He who has understanding, let him calculate the number of the beast, for it is a number of a man. And its number is .
I looked,  lo, the Lamb standing on the mount Zion,  with it a number, a hundred and forty-four thousand, having its name and the name of his Father, written on their foreheads.
I heard a sound from heaven as a sound of many waters,  as a sound of great thunder. And the voice that I heard was as of harpers harping with their harps.
they sing a new song before the throne,  before the four living creatures and the elders. And none could learn the song except the hundred and forty-four thousand, those who have been redeemed from the earth.
These are men who were not defiled with women, for they are virgins. These are those who follow the Lamb wherever he goes. These were purchased by Jesus, out of men, a first fruit to God and to the Lamb.
no lie was found in their mouth, for they are unblemished.
I saw an agent flying in mid-heaven having eternal good news to proclaim to those who sit on the earth,  to every nation and tribe and tongue and people,
saying in a great voice, Fear God,  give him glory, because the hour of his judgment has come. And worship him who made the heaven and the earth and the sea and springs of waters.
another, a second agent, followed, saying, Babylon the great has fallen, has fallen. She has given all the nations to drink of the wine of the wrath of her fornication.
another agent, a third, followed them, saying in a great voice, If any man worships the beast and its image,  receives a mark on his forehead or on his hand,
he also himself will drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which was mixed undiluted in the cup of his anger. And he will be tormented with fire and brimstone before the holy agents and before the Lamb.
the smoke of their torment ascends into the ages of ages. And they have no rest day and night, those who worship the beast and its image,  if any man receives the mark of its name.
Here is the perseverance of the sanctified. Here are those who keep the commandments of God,  the faith of Jesus.
I heard a voice from heaven saying to me, Write, Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord from henceforth. Yea, says the Spirit, so that they may rest from their toils,  their works follow with them.
I looked,  behold, a white cloud. And sitting upon the cloud, like a son of man, having a golden crown on his head and a sharp sickle in his hand.
another agent came out from the temple, crying out in a great voice to him who sits on the cloud, Send forth thy sickle and reap, because the hour has come to reap, because the harvest of the earth is ripe.
he who sits on the cloud cast his sickle upon the earth,  the earth was reaped.
another agent came out from the temple in heaven, also himself having a sharp sickle.
another agent came out from the altar having power over the fire. And he cried out in a great shout to him who has the sharp sickle, saying, Send forth thy sharp sickle,  gather the clusters of the grapevine of the earth, because its grapes are fully ripe.
the agent sent his sickle to the earth,  gathered the vintage of the earth,  cast it into the great winepress of the wrath of God.
the winepress was trampled outside the city,  blood came out from the winepress, up to the bridles of the horses, as far as a thousand and six hundred furlongs.
I saw another sign in heaven, great and marvelous: seven agents having seven plagues, the last, because in them the wrath of God is ended.
I saw like a glassy sea mingled with fire,  those who were victorious over the beast and over its image and over the number of its name, standing on the glassy sea, having harps of God.
they sing the song of Moses the bondman of God,  the song of the Lamb, saying, Great and marvelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty, righteous and true are thy ways, thou King of the nations.
Who will, no, not fear thee, O Lord,  glorify thy name, because thou alone are holy? Because all the nations will come and worship before thee, because thy righteous deeds were made known.
after these things I looked,  the temple of the tabernacle of the testimony in heaven was opened.
the seven agents came forth from the temple having the seven plagues, who were clothed in pure bright linen,  golden belts girded around their breasts.
one of the four living creatures gave to the seven agents seven golden bowls containing the wrath of God who lives into the ages of the ages.
the temple became full of vapor from the glory of God and from his power. And none was able to enter into the temple until the seven plagues of the seven agents were ended.
I heard a great voice out of the temple, saying to the seven agents, Go ye and pour out the seven bowls of the wrath of God into the earth.
the first went and poured out his bowl into the earth,  a bad and evil sore developed upon the men who have the mark of the beast and who worship its image.
the second agent poured out his bowl into the sea,  it became blood like of a dead man,  every living soul in the sea died.
the third agent poured out his bowl into the rivers and into the springs of the waters,  they became blood.
I heard the agent of the waters saying, Thou are righteous who is and was-the Divine-because thou judged these things.
Because they poured out the blood of the sanctified and prophets,  thou have given them blood to drink; they are deserving.
I heard the altar saying, Yea, Lord God Almighty, true and righteous are thy judgments.
the fourth agent poured out his bowl upon the sun,  it was given him to scorch men with fire.
the men were scorched with great heat. And the men blasphemed the name of God who has power over these plagues,  they did not repent to give him glory.
the fifth agent poured out his bowl upon the throne of the beast,  its kingdom became darkened,  they gnawed their tongues from the anguish.
they blasphemed the God of heaven from their pains and from their sores. And they did not repent of their works.
the sixth agent poured out his bowl upon the great river Euphrates,  the water of it was dried up, so that the way of the kings from the rising of the sun might be prepared.
I saw out of the mouth of the dragon,  out of the mouth of the beast,  out of the mouth of the false prophet, three unclean spirits like frogs.
For they are spirits of demons, doing signs that go forth to the kings of the whole world, to gather them together to the battle of that great day of the Almighty God.
Behold, I come as a thief. Blessed is he who watches,  keeps his garments, so that he may not walk naked,  they see his shame.)
he gathered them together into the place called in Hebrew, Armageddon.
the seventh agent poured out his bowl upon the air,  a great voice came forth out of the temple of heaven, out of the throne, saying, It has come to pass.
there occurred lightnings,  thunders,  voices. And a great earthquake occurred, such as did not happen from that time men came to be upon the earth, so mighty an earthquake, so great.
the great city became in three parts,  the cities of the nations fell. And the great Babylon was remembered before God, to give to her the cup of the wine of the wrath of his anger.
every island fled away,  the mountains were not found.
great hail, like a talent weight, descended out of the sky upon men. And the men blasphemed God from the plague of the hail, because the plague of it was exceedingly great.
one of the seven agents who had the seven bowls came and spoke with me, saying, Come, I will show thee the judgment of the great whore who sits upon the many waters
with whom the kings of the earth fornicated,  those who inhabit the earth were made drunken with the wine of her fornication.
he carried me away in spirit into a wilderness. And I saw a woman sitting upon a scarlet-colored beast containing names of blasphemy, having seven heads and ten horns.
the woman was clothed in purple and scarlet, adorned with gold and precious stone and pearls, having in her hand a golden cup containing abominations and the filthy things of her fornication,
upon her forehead a name written, MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF WHORES AND OF THE ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH.
I saw the woman drunken from the blood of the sanctified,  from the blood of the witnesses of Jesus. And having seen her, I wondered with great amazement.
the agent said to me, Why did thou wonder? I will tell thee the mystery of the woman,  of the beast that carries her, which has the seven heads and the ten horns.
The beast that thou saw was,  is not,  is going to ascend out of the abyss and go into destruction. And those who dwell on the earth will wonder, whose names have not been written in the book of life from the foundation of the world, when they see the beast that was,  is not,  will come.
Here is the mind that has wisdom: The seven heads are seven mountains where the woman sits on them.
there are seven kings, the five are fallen, the one is, the other has not yet come,  when he comes he must remain a little while.
the beast that was,  is not, he also is an eighth,  is of the seven,  he goes into destruction.
the ten horns that thou saw are ten kings who have not yet received a kingdom,  they receive authority as kings one hour with the beast.
These have one mind,  they give their power and authority to the beast.
These will war against the Lamb,  the Lamb will conquer them, because he is Lord of lords and King of kings. And those with him are the called and chosen and faithful.
he says to me, The waters that thou saw, where the whore sits, are peoples,  multitudes,  nations,  tongues.
the ten horns that thou saw,  the beast, these will hate the whore,  will make her desolate,  will make her naked,  will eat her flesh,  will burn her with fire.
For God gave in their hearts to do his will. Even to do one will,  to give their kingdom to the beast until the words of God would be ended.
the woman whom thou saw is the great city having reign over the kings of the earth.
after these things I saw another agent coming down out of heaven having great authority,  the earth was illuminated from his glory.
he cried out in a mighty voice, saying, Babylon the great has fallen, has fallen,  became a habitation of demons,  a hold of every unclean spirit,  a hold of every unclean and hated bird.
Because all the nations have drunk from the wine of the wrath of her fornication. And the kings of the earth fornicated with her,  the merchants of the earth became rich from the power of her wantonness.
I heard another voice from heaven, saying, Come out from her, my people, so that ye may not participate with her sins,  that ye may not receive from her plagues.
Because her sins have reached as far as heaven,  God has remembered her iniquities.
Render to her as she also rendered to you,  double to her two-fold according to her works. In the cup that she mixed, mix two-fold for her.
In an amount she glorified herself and lived wantonly, give her so much torment and grief, because she says in her heart, I sit a queen,  am no widow,  will, no, not see grief.
Because of this her plagues will come in one day, death,  grief,  famine. And she will be utterly burned with fire, because strong is the Lord, the God who judged her.
the kings of the earth who fornicated and lived wantonly with her, will weep and will beat their breasts for her when they see the smoke of her burning,
having stood from afar because of the fear of her torment, saying, Alas, alas, the great city, Babylon, the mighty city! Because thy judgment has come in one hour.
the merchants of the earth will weep and mourn for her, because no man buys their merchandise any more,
merchandise of gold,  silver,  precious stone,  pearl,  fine linen,  purple,  silk,  scarlet,  all thyine wood,  every ivory vessel,  every vessel of most precious wood,  of brass,  iron,  marble,
cinnamon,  incense,  ointment,  frankincense,  wine,  olive oil,  fine flour,  wheat,  sheep,  cattle,  horses,  chariots,  bodies and souls of men.
the fruit of the lust of thy soul have departed from thee. And all the fat and bright things are destroyed from thee. And thou will, no, not find them any more.
The merchants of these things who became rich from her will stand from afar because of the fear of her torment, weeping and mourning,
saying, Alas, alas, the great city, which was clothed in fine linen and purple and scarlet,  adorned with gold and precious stone and pearls!
Because in one hour such great wealth was devastated. And every shipmaster,  every man who sails anywhere,  sailors,  as many as work by sea, stood from afar
cried out seeing the smoke of her burning, saying, What is like the great city?
they cast dust on their heads,  cried out, weeping and mourning,  saying, Alas, alas, the great city in which all who had ships in the sea became rich from her luxuriance! Because in one hour she was devastated.
Be glad over her, thou heaven,  the sanctified,  the apostles,  the prophets, because God has decreed your judgment of her.
one mighty agent took up a stone like a great millstone and cast it into the sea, saying, Thus in violence Babylon the great city will be thrown down,  will, no, not be found any more.
a sound of harpers and minstrels and flute-players and trumpeters will, no, not be heard in thee any more. And every craftsman of every craft will, no, not be found in thee any more. And a sound of a millstone will, no, not be heard in thee any more.
the light of a lamp will, no, not shine in thee any more. And a voice of a bridegroom and of a bride will, no, not be heard in thee any more. Because thy merchants were the chief men of the earth, because all the nations were led astray by thy enchantments.
in her was found blood of prophets,  of the sanctified,  of all who have been killed upon the earth.
after these things I heard as a great sound of a large multitude in heaven, saying, Praise the Lord, the salvation,  the power,  the glory of our God!
Because true and righteous are his judgments, because he has judged the great whore who ruined the earth by her fornication,  he has avenged the blood of his bondmen from her hand.
a second time they said, Praise the Lord! And the smoke of her ascended into the ages of the ages.
the twenty-four elders and the four living creatures fell down and worshiped God who sits on the throne, saying, Truly! Praise the Lord!
a voice came forth from the throne, saying, Praise ye our God, all his bondmen and those who fear him, the small and the great.
I heard as the sound of a large multitude,  as the sound of many waters,  as the sound of mighty thunders, saying, Praise the Lord! Because the Lord our God, the Almighty, reigns.
We should be glad and rejoice and give the glory to him, because the marriage of the Lamb has come,  his wife has prepared herself.
it was given her that she clothe herself in fine linen, bright and pure. For the fine linen is the righteous deeds of the sanctified.
he says to me, Write, Blessed are those who have been called to the supper of the marriage of the Lamb. And he says to me, These are the true sayings of God.
I fell down before his feet to worship him. And he says to me, See thou not. I am a fellow bondman of thee and thy brothers, those who have the testimony of Jesus. Worship God, for the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy.
I saw the heaven opened,  behold a white horse,  he who sits upon it called Faithful and True,  in righteousness he judges and makes war.
his eyes are a flame of fire,  upon his head are many diadems having names written,  a name written that none knows except he himself,
clothed in a garment dipped in blood. And his name is called The Word of God.
the armies in heaven followed him upon white horses, clothed in fine linen, pure white.
a sharp two-edged sword comes out of his mouth, so that he would smite the nations by it. And he will tend them with a rod of iron. And he treads the winepress of the wine of the wrath of the anger of the Almighty God.
he has on his garment and on his thigh a name written, KING OF KINGS AND LORD OF LORDS.
I saw one agent having stood in the sun,  he cried out in a great voice, saying to all the birds flying in mid-heaven, Come, gather together to the great supper of God,
so that ye may eat the flesh of kings,  the flesh of captains,  the flesh of mighty men,  the flesh of horses and of those who sit upon them,  the flesh of all men, both freemen and bondmen,  both small and great.
I saw the beast,  the kings of the earth,  their armies gathered together to make war against him who sits upon the horse,  against his army.
the beast was taken,  the false prophet with it who did the signs in its sight by which he led astray those who received the mark of the beast and those who worship its image. The two were thrown alive into the lake of fire that burns with brimstone.
the others were killed by the sword that comes forth out of his mouth (of him who sits upon the horse),  all the birds were filled from their flesh.
I saw an agent coming down out of heaven having the key of the abyss and a great chain in his hand.
he seized the dragon, the old serpent, who is the Devil and Satan, who leads the whole world astray,  bound him a thousand years.
he cast him into the abyss,  locked and sealed over him, so that he would no longer lead the nations astray until the thousand years were ended. After these things he must be loosed for a little time.
I saw thrones,  they sat upon them. And judgment was given to them and the souls of those who were beheaded because of the testimony of Jesus,  because of the word of God,  who did not worship the beast nor his image,  did not receive the mark upon their forehead and upon their hand. And they lived,  reigned with the Christ the thousand years.
The rest of the dead did not live until the thousand years were ended. This is the first resurrection.
Blessed and holy is he who has part in the first resurrection. On these the second death has no power,  they will be priests of God and of the Christ,  will reign with him a thousand years.
when the thousand years are ended, Satan will be loosed out of his prison.
he will come forth to lead astray the nations in the four corners of the earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them together to the battle, of whom the number of them is as the sand of the sea.
they went up on the breadth of the earth,  surrounded the encampment of the sanctified and the beloved city. And fire came down out of heaven from God,  devoured them.
the devil who leads them astray was cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, where also were the beast and the false prophet. And they will be tormented day and night into the ages of the ages.
I saw a great white throne,  him who sits upon it, from whose face the earth and the sky fled away,  no place was found for them.
I saw the dead, the great and the small, standing before the throne,  books were opened,  another book was opened, which is the one of life. And the dead were judged from the things that were written in the books, according to their works.
the sea gave up the dead in it,  death and Hades gave up the dead in them. And they were judged, each according to their works.
death and Hades were cast into the lake of fire. This is the second death, the lake of fire.
if any man was found not written in the book of life, he was thrown into the lake of fire.
I saw a new heaven and a new earth, for the first heaven and the first earth passed away,  the sea is no more.
I saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God, having been prepared as a bride adorned for her husband.
I heard a great voice out of heaven saying, Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men,  he will dwell with them,  they will be his people. And God himself will be with them.
he will wipe away every tear from their eyes. And there will not be any more death, nor grief, nor crying, nor will there be any more anguish, because the former things are gone.
he who sits upon the throne said, Behold, I make all things new. And he says to me, Write, because these words are true and faithful.
he said to me, I have become, I, the Alpha and the Omega, the beginning and the end. I will give to him who is thirsty of the fountain of the water of life freely.
He who overcomes will inherit these things,  I will be God to him,  he will be a son to me.
But for the cowards,  unbelieving,  sinful,  abominable,  murderers,  fornicators,  sorcerers,  idolaters,  all liars, their part is in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death.
there came one of the seven agents who had the seven bowls containing the seven last plagues,  he spoke with me, saying, Come, I will show thee the woman, the bride of the Lamb.
he carried me away in spirit to a great and high mountain,  showed me the great city, holy Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God,
having the glory of God, the light of it similar to a most precious stone, like a jasper stone being crystal clear,
which has a great and high wall having twelve gates,  at the gates twelve agents,  names inscribed, which are the names of the twelve tribes of the sons of Israel:
from the east, three gates,  from the north, three gates,  from the south, three gates,  from the west, three gates.
the wall of the city having twelve foundations,  on them the twelve names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb.
he who spoke with me had a measure, a golden reed, so that he might measure the city,  the gates of it,  the walls of it.
the city lies foursquare,  the length of it is as great as the breadth. And he measured the city with the reed, twelve thousand furlongs, the length and the breadth and the height of it being equal.
he measured the wall of it, a hundred and forty-four forearms, a measure of a man, that is, of an agent.
the structure of its wall was jasper. And the city was pure gold, similar to clear glass.
the foundations of the wall of the city adorned with every precious stone. The first foundation was jasper, the second, sapphire, the third, chalcedony, the fourth, emerald,
the fifth, sardonyx, the sixth, sardius, the seventh, chrysolite, the eighth, beryl, the ninth, topaz, the tenth, chrysoprase, the eleventh, jacinth, the twelfth, amethyst.
the twelve gates were twelve pearls apiece, each one of the gates was of one pearl. And the thoroughfare of the city was pure gold, like transparent glass.
I saw no temple in it, for the Lord God Almighty is the temple of it,  the Lamb.
the city has no need of the sun, nor of the moon, so that they might shine in it, for the glory of God illuminated it,  the light of it is the Lamb.
the nations will walk by the light of it. And the kings of the earth bring to them the splendor and worth of the nations into it.
the gates of it will, no, not be locked by day, for there will be no night there.
they will bring the splendor and the worth of the nations into it.
there will, no, not enter into it anything profane,  doing an abomination and a lie, since they are not written in the Lamb's book of life.
he showed me a pure river of water of life, bright as crystal, coming out from the throne of God and of the Lamb,
in the middle of its thoroughfare. And on this side of the river and on that was a tree of life, bearing twelve fruits, yielding its fruit according to each month. And the leaves of the tree were for the healing of the nations.
there will be no curse there. And the throne of God and of the Lamb will be in it,  his bondmen will serve him.
they will see his face,  his name is on their foreheads.
there will be no night there,  they have no need of a lamp and the light of sun, because the Lord God will illuminate them. And they will reign into the ages of the ages.
he says to me, These words are faithful and true. And the Lord, the God of the spirits of the prophets, sent his agent to show to his bondmen the things that must quickly come to pass.
behold, I come quickly. Blessed is he who keeps the words of the prophecy of this book.
I am John, the man hearing and seeing these things. And when I heard and saw, I fell down to worship before the feet of the agent showing me these things.
he says to me, See thou not. I am thy fellow bondman,  of thy brothers the prophets,  of those who keep the words of this book. Worship God!
he says to me, Do not seal the words of the prophecy of this book, for the time is near.
Let the man doing wrong still do wrong,  let the filthy man still be filthy. And let the righteous man still do righteousness,  let the holy man still be holy.
Behold, I come quickly,  my reward is with me to render to each man as his work will be
I, the Alpha and the Omega, the first and the last, the beginning and the end.
Blessed are those doing his commandments, so that their right will be to the tree of life,  they may enter in the gates into the city.
Outside are the dogs,  the sorcerers,  the fornicators,  the murderers,  the idolaters,  every man who loves and makes a lie.
I, Jesus, have sent my agent to testify these things to you for the congregations. I am the root and the offspring of David, the bright, the morning star.
the Spirit and the bride say, Come. And he who hears, let him say, Come. And he who is thirsty, let him come. He who desires, let him take the water of life freely.
I testify to every man who hears the words of the prophecy of this book, if any man should add to them, God will add to him the seven plagues that are written in this book.
if any man takes away from the words of the book of this prophecy, God will take away his part from the tree of life,  from the holy city, the things written in this book.
He who testifies these things says, Yea, I come quickly. Truly. Yea, come, Lord Jesus!
The grace of the Lord Jesus is with all the sanctified. Truly.
